15. A&#239;: A&#239; or Ay is the name of a town in the Marne Department of Northern France, where this champagne originates.
A balding fop, of toil a foe,
A ball here, there a children’s evening,
Abandoned his inheritance,
Abandon hope for evermore.
A bear, a blizzard, little bridge,
A bearded outrider is seated
A bond to which she’d not consented;
A bonneted scholar at a ball
A book containing vulgar tales,
A book, sound sleep, a fine excursion,
A bottle of resplendent wine,
About her.’Well then, what’s the matter?’
About his dress – a pedant or
About some government affair;
About those times you keep invoking,
About those years, can you recall
About to cry, poor thing, she’s ready
About town fashions and events.
Above all at that special time
Above a river without name,
Above a stream. Far off, there stretched
Above the daft horizon on us.’
Above their brows hell’s admonition:
Above the mist-enveloped river;
63. Above the sea, forever roaming: Pushkin’s note 10 has: ‘Written in Odessa.’ It was from here that Pushkin sought to escape from Russia.
Above the sea, forever roaming,
A brace of pistols, bullets two –
Absorbed in household calculations,
Abundant trade that knows no leisure
A burly bear with ruffled fur;
A camel lies in rocky shadows.
A captivating, harmful mixture?
5. a cast-iron statuette… hat: Certain to be Napoleon in classic pose.
Accepts his stanza gracefully.
Accept these chapters and their rhymes,
Accept these chapters and their rhymes,
Acclimatized, became contented.
A certain general of substance
A certain sign that guests were nearing.
A chain of inns on every route.
A challenge or cartel he’d penned;
A cherished dream in which I stand
A chill, dark dawn presages winter;
A chilling comment, and he thought:
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
A company commander came,
A contract with the ‘honest guy’.
26. a cool-headed general: Sergei Grigor’ evich Volkonsky (1788–1865), a leader of the Southern Society, sentenced to twenty years hard labour.
A cosmopolitan, a patriot,
Acquire their wealth, and what they live on
A crop of exquisite new creatures
Across the bookshelf’s dusty crew.
Across the crags of Caucasus!
Across the pits the carriage flashes,
Across the river, smoking, glow
Across the room, while gravely raising
Across the sombre sky and crumble,
Across the stage with noisy roars;
Across the stage with noisy roars;
Across this Hellespont he swam,
A cue lay on the billiard baize,
A cunning servant girl intent
A dagger meant to slay the Tsar.
11. Adam Smith: Scottish economist (1723–90) who influenced the Decembrists.
A dandy, as we said before.
A daredevil kibitka hurries,
A dark, untamed and age-old current,
5. A. D. Briggs produced a ‘revised translation’ in 1995, which does not essentially change the nature of Elton’s version (Alexander Pushkin, Yevgeny Onegin, edited with revised translation by A. D. P. Briggs, based on a translation by Oliver Elton, illustrated by M. V. Dobujinsky (London: Everyman, 1995)).
1. Addressed to P. A. Pletnyov (1792–1865), man of letters and minor poet, in later years academician and rector of St Petersburg University. He met Pushkin in 1817 and remained one of his closest friends. From 1825 he was his principal publisher and, after the poet’s death, his first biographer.
A demon new will enter me;
A devotee of Kant and rhyme.
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)
(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Admirer of Aonia’s maids,
‘Admit that in our backwoods haven,
Adored the Russian winter season,
A dream, now sad, now full of charm,
A drive is light and pleasant. Like
A dullish season lay in wait;
A dunderheaded clown and foe,
Advanced four steps, not aiming yet,
36. Aeolus: Ancient Greek god of wind.
A fancy meal at which to idle,
A fashion that is past and done
A few odd volumes of Malvina;
Affection of the invalid,
A fiery steed with trusty bridle,
A fiery welcome she prepared
A fixed idea he keeps on mulling.
(A flattering hope!), when I am famous,
A flood of tears she softly sheds
A fop and Ensign in the Guards.
A free man in the bloom of years
A freemason, a crack-brained ass;
A fresh, young kiss for his diversion
A friend of liberty and reason,
A friend or foe, I wish to part
A friend to every winter’s night.
A frightful prospect, if applied;
A frosty night; a sky transparent;
1824–6 After misdemeanours in Odessa, exile continued in greater isolation of parental estate of Mikhailovskoe. The Gipsies (1824); Count Nulin; Boris Godunov (1825). Misses Decembrist Revolt of 1825, ruthlessly suppressed by new emperor, Nicholas I.
After this maiden he admired.
A full account of everything,
7. Agafon: In this context a comical peasant’s name, derived from the Greek Agathon. As Pushkin points out in his note 13 to Chapter II, concerning his choice of Tatiana’s name, sweet-sounding’ Greek names are only used by the common people. Asking the name of the first pedestrian Tatiana comes across is another ritual for discovering the name of her future intended.
Against a sudden icy patch.
Against each other swiftly beat.
A gallop in the bitter prairie?
A garden by a limpid river.
Aged such and such, in such a year.
A giant ballroom shook and pounded,
A gravestone, Aphrodite’s temple,
A great delight to conversations.
A grey-haired Kalmyk stands inside,
A greyish powder was decanted
A grief that went not very deep.
A group of former friends turned rotten,
A group of kindly neighbours, who,
A guard of old mustachios,
A guest, hussar Pykhtin, was here,
‘A habit, Lensky – all that chatter.’
A happy squire, with cuckold’s crown,
14. A Harold, Quaker, Pharisee: ‘Harold: i.e. Byron’s Childe Harold. Quaker: a member of the religious society of friends, founded by George Fox in 1648–50, adopting peaceful principles and plain living. Pharisee: originally a member of an ancient Jewish sect distinguished by its strict obsevance of tradition and written law; latterly, a self-righteous person or hypocrite.
A Harold, Quaker, Pharisee
A heart that long ago turned heartless;
A heavy goose steps out with caution,
A herdsman to the tomb retreating
A hermit underneath God’s heaven
A heroic age had come to an end that began with the French Revolution and of which the Decembrist revolt was Europe’s last echo. In poems of 1821 and 1824 Pushkin mourned the death of the epoch’s giants, Napoleon and Byron, despite his fluctuating attitudes to them. (Onegin’s study is adorned with a portrait of Byron and a statuette of Napoleon.) Pushkin was already concerning himself with the role of prose in 1822, at the height of his Romantic period, a decade before he embarked on prose fiction, insisting on the need for ‘precision and brevity’, as well as ‘thought and more thought’. While poetry, he acknowledged, was different, it, too, he declared, would benefit from ‘a larger stock of ideas’, adding: ‘Our literature won’t get very far on memories of vanished youth.’
11. Ah freedom… he embraced: Ibid., p. 157.
Ah freedom! It was you alone
A high-born rhymester’s done it, too.
Ah, little, little feet! I wonder
A home forever silent, chill,
A household boy served up the cream;
‘Ah Tanya, come to me, my dear…
A hunter crouched behind a bush.
A hunter crouched behind a bush.
A hut appears; all’s wild around
A¿ I can no longer savour;
A¿ is like a woman’s favour,
A jackanapes, a bird of passage,
27. A jackanapes… overstarched: The reference is possibly to Thomas Raikes, an Englishman who claims he met Pushkin in 1829. Beau Brummell had set the fashion for a lightly starched cravat in the first decade and a half of the century. Overstarching, which became the fashion in the late twenties, in France and Russia, was considered vulgar.
A jealous anguish makes her start,
‘Akul’ka’ formerly ‘Selina’,
A labyrinthine web of wonders,
A lady’s love up to this day
A Lafontaine account of rapture…
A lancer wooed with practised charm,
A languid light, illuminating
A languid mind won’t smile or dance,
A languid peace showed on his brow.
Alas! each generation must
Alas! each generation must
Alas, her sister, whom she missed,
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
Alas, it lies beyond my vision,
Alas, much life I have neglected
Alas, poor Lensky! In the kingdom
Alas, Tatiana’s fading, waning;
Alas, the virtues you are famed for,
(Alas, too salty for the throttle).
27. Albani: Francesco Albani (1578–1660), Italian painter popular in the eighteenth century.
61. Albion’s proud poetry: Byron’s poetry.
A leftward path from the location
A lengthy tablecloth or pressed
A letter for her hero lover…
Alexander Pushkin (1799–1837) is by the common consent of his compatriots Russia’s greatest writer. He is to Russia what Shakespeare is to England, Goethe to Germany and Dante to Italy. He lived at the springtime of Russian literature, which had gained its independent language only some fifty years before his birth. There was no unified language before Mikhail Lomonosov formulated it in his famous grammar of 1755. Before that, Church Slavonic coexisted with the disparate dialects of the civil service and the business community. With the growth of a centralized state a national language appeared.
ALEXANDER PUSHKIN
ALEXANDER SERGEYEVICH PUSHKIN was born in Moscow in 1799. He was liberally educated and left school in 1817. Given a sinecure in the Foreign Office, he spent three dissipated years in St Petersburg writing light, erotic and highly polished verse. He flirted with several pre-Decembrist societies, composing the mildly revolutionary verses which led to his disgrace and exile in 1820. After travelling through the Caucasus and the Crimea, he was sent to Bessarabia, where he wrote The Captive of the Caucasus and The Fountain at Bakhchisaray, and began Eugene Onegin. His work took an increasingly serious turn during the last year of his southern exile, in Odessa. In 1824 he was transferred to his parents’ estate at Mikhailovskoe in north-west Russia, where he spent two solitary but fruitful years during which he wrote his historical drama Boris Godunov, continued Eugene Onegin and finished The Gipsies. After the failure of the Decembrist Revolt in 1825 and the succession of a new tsar, Pushkin was granted conditional freedom in 1826. During the next three years he wandered restlessly between St Petersburg and Moscow. He wrote an epic poem, Poltava, but little else. In 1829 he went with the Russian army to Transcaucasia, and the following year, stranded by a cholera outbreak at the small family estate of Boldino, he wrote his experimental Little Tragedies in blank verse and The Tales of Belkin in prose, and virtually completed Eugene Onegin. In 1831 he married the beautiful Natalya Goncharova. The rest of his life was soured by debts and the malice of his enemies. Although his literary output slackened, he produced his major prose works The Queen of Spades and The Captain’s Daughter, his masterpiece in verse, The Bronze Horseman, important lyrics and fairy tales, including The Tale of the Golden Cockerel. Towards the end of 1836 anonymous letters goaded Pushkin into challenging a troublesome admirer of his wife to a duel. He was mortally wounded and died in January 1837.
A lily of the valley, hidden
A lily’s stalklet to enfold,
Alina!’ ‘Who’d have thought? It’s been
A little maiden’s modest love.
A little pale, a little thin,
Alive, at liberty once more,
All, all I’ve wanted to express,
All but divorced her husband, too,
All cross themselves as seats are found.
All daughters were eligible
All evening Lensky was abstracted,
All faint and numb, aflame and fearing,
All go to table, arm in arm,
All in Onegin coalesced.
All is alive: the people there,
All it contains is dark and still,
All, like an empty echo cease.
All lots were equal anyhow…
All lovers of a funeral.
All objects held a secret content,
All objects seemed without a pause
Allow me: you perhaps may need a
Allows his pawn to take his rook.
All prejudices, we consider
All rights reserved
All round was silent, save a sentry
All sad and silent like Svetlana,
All’s calm: from the salon ascended
All seem to her like priceless treasures,
All send him to the doctors, they
All set her languid soul astir
All’s hushed. Sleep overtakes the lass.
All sons of avid tedium!
All’s quiet. For her the moon has cast
All started furtively to lecture,
All strike the senses suddenly.
All that concerns her, every mention:
All that exults and radiates
All that is well and good, except
All these in her imagination
All these were subjects of concern.
All things promoted disputations
All this, friends, signified: I shall
All this on the Neva, iced over;
All this so terrified Tatiana,
All this was mere ennui and fashion,
All this was novel to Onegin;
All this will frequently afford
All this, with which you made me cower,
All was quite simple; oaken floorboards,
All were by different shackles fettered;
Alone, above the sea – and then,
Alone, alone now is Tatiana!
Alone among his acquisitions,
Alone, beside it, grey and feeble,
Alone, encountering his soul,
Alone, not understood and ailing,
Alone, Tatiana roams within
Along a forest path he rushes,
Along my tracks, if not Eugene,
Alongside anxious merchants, had
Alongside verses incomplete.
A long time passes by, quiescent,
Along whose narrow tracks so neat
A look miraculously tender.
6. A Lovelace for a Grandison: Respectively villain of Clarissa Harlowe and hero of Sir Charles Grandison (see note 5 above).
A Lovelace for a Grandison.
Already at the altar she
Already, burdened by his wrongs,
Already has a finger frozen.
Already stirring in my soul,
Already suffering from consumption?
Already they put him to sleep;
Already, though, Onegin’s gone
Already, though, Onegin’s gone
Already to my thirtieth year?
Already versed in artful play,
Alternatively reconcile them,
Although, as we’re aware, Onegin
Although he’s not a well-known figure,
Although (in this I share his views)
Although Onegin looked most closely,
Although some tricks he perpetrated
Although the Pushkin age was short-lived, and Pushkin himself died at thirty-seven, his work provided the seeds for the later Russian novel and several operas. Eugene Onegin inaugurated a lineage of superfluous men and self-sacrificing women in the novels of Mikhail Lermontov, Alexander Herzen and Ivan Turgenev, and in Tchaikovsky’s opera version of Pushkin’s novel-in-verse. Pushkin suggested the plots of Dead Souls and The Inspector General to Nikolai Gogol, appreciating the latter’s gifts for the grotesque that were outside his more classical bent. Leo Tolstoy emulated Pushkin’s storytelling manner, comparing it with Homer’s, and his novel Anna Karenina describes what might have happened to Tatiana had she given in to Onegin. With Fyodor Dostoevsky, who condemned the Onegin type as a Western intrusion and glorified Tatiana as the exemplar of Russian womanhood, a nationalist cult of Pushkin began that has not ceased. Radicals and conservatives fought over Pushkin’s characters as if they were real people. Opponents of Tsarism saw Onegin, Lensky and Tatiana as kindred victims of feudal Russia.
Although we won’t acknowledge it.
Always and everywhere one vision,
5. a madrigal: In this context is a complimentary poem written for society albums.
A madrigal, the merest slush,
A maiden in her small hut, singing,
A malady, whose explanation
A man of educated station,
A manor house, a village, trees,
A man’s attire, who, thus arrayed,
A Martin Zadek won’t dispel,
A melancholy, crazed impostor
A merry nameday festival.
Amidst admirers acquiescent
Amidst this melancholy crew,
Amid the bloom of hope, desire
Amid the wastes of sad Moldavia
A mirror on the moon, complaining
A missive could not be deferred.
A modern Regulus, honour’s god,
Among the empty dinner plates.
Among the men she’d be the centre,
Among these careless lines, reflections –
A monogram: an O and E.
A moral brings on somnolence,
A more demonic figure, this time with a name, Aleko, a perhaps conscious variant of Pushkin’s first name, appears in The Gipsies (1824), written concurrently with the first chapters of Onegin. When living in Kishinev, Pushkin had apparently spent several weeks with a roving gipsy tribe. In this poem a disaffected Russian nobleman once more seeks refuge in a more natural way of life, this time in a gipsy encampment, where he returns the attentions of a fiery young woman, Zemphira, who, through Prosper M&#233;rim&#233;e’s translation, was to become the prototype for Bizet’s Carmen. When, after two years, Zemphira tires of him and takes a younger gipsy lover, Aleko, in a fit of jealousy, kills them both. Zemphira’s father, the Elder of the tribe, dismisses him with the sentence: ‘You want freedom for yourself alone’, a phrase repeated by Dostoyevsky to condemn what he diagnosed as the corrosive individualism infecting Russia from the West. Pushkin’s Tatiana, he pointed out, refused the freedom Onegin offered so as not to build her happiness on the unhappiness of her husband. Both the indifference of the captive and the possessiveness of Aleko enter into Onegin’s character – from his dismissal of Tatiana’s early love for him to his overwhelming passion for her when she is married and distinguished. Already in her dream, when he silences the monsters crying ‘mine’ to her with his own grim uptake of the word, Tatiana recognizes this egotism. As in The Gipsies possessiveness and murder go hand in hand. Tatiana sees the destroyer in Onegin. The killing of Lensky in the dream foretells the duel. Was he an angel or a tempter, she had asked Onegin in her letter. In the dream he is truly demonic. In both the Elder’s judgement on Aleko and Tatiana’s rejection of Onegin, Dostoyevsky discovered a Russian ethos, and perhaps he was right. Certainly, Pushkin’s work, from The Gipsies and Onegin onwards, may be summed up as a debate with the West and a search for Russian values. The concept of the nation, first raised by the French Revolution, was being discussed throughout Europe at this time, and not least in Russia.
A most significant impression
A mound of snow, already teetering,
A multitude of sad occasions.
A Muscovite in Harold’s cloak,
24. ananas: Pineapple, an expensive taste throughout the nineteenth century and of Latin American revolutionaries today.
An apostate from stormy pleasure,
An artless soul’s imagining!
8. an awesome critic: The critic is Wilhelm K&#252;chelbecker (1797–1846), who in an essay of 1824 denounced the elegy and praised the ode.
And a Circassian’s steed through meadows
And a cool-headed general
And, after fighting off each hound,
And after them, outside the manor,
And agitated when they met;
And all beneath the tranquil night
And all cry out: ‘She’s mine! She’s mine!
And all have spilled into the hall,
And, all her senses in commotion,
And all of them send salutations.
And all the way sat silently.
And an attractive countenance.
And ancient Russia’s rural ways.
And any purpose in his life.
And arguments and cheerful dreams.
And as for Lensky’s wedding, they
And as he fattened, life grew heavier,
And, as her fiery eyes she dips,
And as the art of love rewarded.
And, as with all he’d left behind,
And, at a trot, she rides through meadows,
And at his pallid brow take aim
And at their table guests were served
And, at the tavern’s door, the pack
And beat an iridescent wing,
And beat an iridescent wing,
And, bending downward, rests his head
And better looking, to my mind,
And blessed before he joined the dust…
And bless the ditches and the moats
And, blinded in his naive fashion,
And blushes as he turns the page.
And bow in manner unaffected.
And breeding ducks and geese, is free
And bribe-taker who loved to eat.
And, bustling, said goodbye and hovered,
And by degrees his thought and feeling
And by degrees the day grows bright.
And by some ruse avert his breast
And by the long mazurka vexed,
And, by the way, I like to talk
And by the way two words, updating:
And by the window sat and stared.’
And, by this lancer overpowered,
13. ‘And cabbage soup, while I’m the squire’: Quotation from the poet Antiokh Dimitrievich Kantemir’s (1708–44) fifth satire, ‘On Human Depravity in General, in literal translation: ‘A pot of cabbage soup, but I m the big one, master of the house. A similar Russian proverb reads: ‘My fare is plain, but I am my own master.
‘And cabbage soup, while I’m the squire.’
And cannot get my fill of it.
And captures glory’s palm to boot;
And cast-iron bridges will support us
And catch her feet in my embraces!
And catch her in our tempting nets.
And centuries-old prejudices,
And change my course (entreating patience),
And chanted while to church I crept.
And charms of grave simplicity.
And childish escapades were foreign
And choke him with a tragedy,
And Christendom will institute
And chuckled over this and that.
And cleared the darkness from my mind,
And cleave to you when times were bitter,
And clinking wine-glasses ring out.
And coldly jealous. I’m like him.
And comet wine spurts forth and flows,
And councillor-in-retirement, Flyanov,
And courting a fair mistress, kneeling
And crackling frost settles already
And crowding deep inside his soul.
And curious to find out more
And curling, shoulder-length black hair.
And cursed their leisurely observance
And day and evening disappears;
And did not care what secret tome
And died according to convention
And dimly sees, reflected in it,
And disregarded Cicero,
And distant hills that were by winter’s
And district mothers, all aflame.
And does not give a damn about you,
And dogged him like a faithful wife
And, donning a broad bolivar,
And dreamings of a pensive soul.
And dressed…
And dropped into the fire, unseen,
And ducklings doing as they please;
And duck the pistol by retreating.
And Dunya pours him out a cup,
And each one whispers in her ear:
And earlier sadness still I rue.
And earn for me the prize of fame:
And eau-de-pomme in jugs and jars
And eighteen nags invade the yard.
And epigrams in sombre style.
And Eugene, gently condescending,
And even at this very second,
And even Didelot’s boring stuff.’
And even you, young beauties, gracing
And ever is prepared to babble
And every day and night imagines,
And every day and night were full
And everything Onegin knows…
And exclamations pour apace.
And, eyes a-twinkle with the fun,
And fairly faithfully depicted:
And fairly faithfully depicted:
And falls upon a bench… exclaiming:
And fame’s sweet pain, inebriation
And far niente is my law.
And feather beds and mattresses,
And feelings, too, by him unshared.
And female reapers come to sink
And finally appeared becapped
And finally, as night was ending,
And finally be turned to stone
And finally be turned to stone
And finally managed to persuade her
And fixedly he looks, while she
And fled afar… she followed me.
And Flyanov (somewhat over-sated)
And, following the rules obtaining,
And follow rules of ancient days
And fools – a necessary class;
And, for the first time now, I’m taking
And for the humble churchyard near us,
And found a different world indeed.
And found the role he best could fill.
And from my old life take a rest.
And from the table has not stirred.
And from this sad one take my leave.
And gambol like a young bacchante,
And gazed upon the darkened field.
And gaze into her eyes – they say
And give his bones a peaceful berth
And given neighbours cause for talk.
And golden autumn is arriving.
And golden-glistening pea trees
And grace the world with blissful days.
And gradually my Tatiana
And Grandison the consummate
And grandmothers in chorus cry:
And, gravely, afterwards dispersed
And halts her steed, before it pausing,
And hands him linen with panache.
And happiness so near… But no,
And, happy one, without degrading
And hardly suits our etiquette;
And, hating slavery’s oppression,
And have the horses moved to where
And having scorned the threats of Phoebus,
And he, a fiery rake, his leave takes
And, hearing her alarming cry,
And hearing them stirs up our heart.
And hearken to your magic voice!
And hears a voice: ‘Well then, he’s dead!’
And he did not become a poet,
And he found Tanya such a marvel,
And hellish spectres; savage cries
And he recalled the mournful manner
And he received a second crown.
And hold a placid conversation…
And how the hero will be known;
And how you lectured me, so meek.
And husbands with their friendly stance!
And hymn of praise to heaven’s sire.
And I foresee your proud expression
And if the master once requested…’
And I had no desire to forfeit
And I – I with a sigh confess –
And I – I with a sigh confess –
And I’m deprived of that: for you
And in a letter undesigned
And in a maiden’s sweet embrace.
And in a whisper, bends, confiding
And in a youthful gathering
And incoherent rot holds sway;
And in full glory shines the ball.
And in her cruel isolation
And in her hands a small, French book.
And in her heart the thought was live;
And in her household these occasions
And in her native tongue she could
And, in its free vivacity,
And, in its thick, entangled bowers
And in my Africa to sigh
And in my garden she appeared
And in my sleep they stir my heart.
And in my soul all trace has vanished,
And, in our years, bon ton, propriety
And, in profound abstraction pacing,
And in that amicable crowd,
And in the bathhouse of the manor
And in the end could leave it, but
And in their singsong tones impart
And in the log hut, losing patience
And in the margins she encountered
And, in the morning, does not know
And, in the novel’s closing action,
And in the place of belle Nina
And in the snowfall buried deep.
And, in the study’s silent setting,
And into my poetic glass
And in your heart, what did I find?
And I, poor Tanya, listless, ceded,
And I – remembering Svetlana –
And is it this you were awaiting
And is the garland of my youth
And I surrender to my fate.
1. And it hurries… Prince Vyazemsky: The epigraph is from ‘The First Snow’ (1819), a poem by Pushkin’s close friend Prince Pyotr Vyazemsky (1792–1878), mentioned several times in Onegin and appearing in person in Chapter VIII. The ‘it’ is ‘youthful ardour’, compared to the intoxication of a sleigh ride.
And it hurries to live and it hastens to feel.
And it is time, indeed high time
And, it may be, more gently still.
And I was just thirteen, you see.
And I, who make the rule of passions
And jealous female whisperings
And joins Onegin in recapturing
And judges, captious and obtuse,
And keep a hold on your lorgnette!
And keep awaiting him each day;
And kiss her, gently squeezing hands,
And later in tranquillity
And, later, secretly revile them
And lead them to the altar then…
And, leaning on a doorpost, he
And, leaning on a table, guess
And leave then for a stroll. Already,
And led them to reflect: they would
And left them, feeling no connection,
And Lensky with a dreamy look
And life and destiny in turn –
And life, empowered, sends up shoots
And lighter than a swallow, saying:
And, lightly clad, would set off till
And, like a shade, she wanders, goalless,
And likewise Lensky calculated,
And Limburg cheese’s living mass.
And little bound to it I am;
And lively multiformity.
And lo! a leap, and lo! she flies,
And longer, too, the lazy East,
And looked at Eugene unperturbed
And, looking at him fixedly,
And loses the desire to rove.
And lost all in a final crash.
And love and hate, and aspiration
And made a song of every word.
And, maid of beauty, in your sorrow,
And make us bow to grammar’s rule:
And managed to engage her soul,
And meagre menu to excite
And, meanwhile, still her soul is aching,
And men of wit constrain your space?
And midst the coastal cliffs afar
And mileposts, like a fence, race by,
And mind the beauty of one’s nails:
And Mithridates take his life;
And modern man put on parade
And modern man put on parade
And money, too, by being thrifty;
And moonlit sky grows dim. A valley
And mortgaged, therefore, all his land.
And Moscow pretty women, too,
And mourning taffeta he drew
And Muryavyov, to him inclining,
And muttered in a reverie.
And my ideal of proud, young maid,
And my young age. But now, I see
And my Zaretsky, as I said,
And nameless torment, tribulation…
And nature’s wayward disposition,
And near him, an old man, who’d seen her,
And nearly drove him off his head
And never show a nose. They’re slighted.
And noise and shouting blast the ear;
And no less dated turns of phrase,
And nonchalantly held lorgnettes.
And not an ink stain anywhere;
And nothing past can be recovered;
And not the solemn inquisition
And not to mention me by name…’
And not to venture from his sight!
And now, alas, her hot, lone slumber,
And now from an adjacent quarter
And now she’s ready to adore
And now Tatiana’s heart was soaring
And offered equal cause for comment
And, on a little column standing,
And once, engaged in actual battle,
And once more given to inaction,
And one fine day our grandsons will
And on his deathbed, looking forward
And only mediocrity
And on the floor Monsieur Triquet
And, on the grave, in moonlight glow,
And on the hilltops of Tul’chin,
And on the last you will be reading:
And on the steppeland of the Bug,
And our sweet sex is light as fluff.
And our young maid enjoyed completely
And, over cups, to guests she’d sing,
And oxen, horns inclined, replace
And pale complexion of Tatiana;
And, parting from the Muses, married;
And passion’s unrestricted play.
And past imperious dames she flits.
And, past times having lost their hold,
And pensively he drives back home,
And Petushkov, our fop, came, too;
And Petushkov – she left the room then.
And plans to swim, but in a trice,
And play the part of horse instead,
And plunged into a reverie,
And, possibly the apprehension
And pours in playful, frothy splashes
And preached to in a t&#234;te-&#224;-t&#234;te
And profiled heads are silhouetted
And, quickly, opening the door,
And ranks and years that mixed at ease.
And read a book the morning through…
And, reader, now, in this mischance,
And read the books there on her own.
And read the note the poet sent.
Andrew, Joe, Writers and Society during the Rise of Russian Realism (London: Macmillan, 1980)
And, river-like, his elegies
6. And, river-like… verities: A rare example of a two-rhyme octet resembling the Italian sonnet, which I render imperfectly – ababaabb. A similar, but less exact version is to be found in Chapter V, stanza 10.
And Russia’s Tsar was king of kings.
And sad snow covers roof and ground,
And sad, Tatiana shone,
And sallied forth without direction,
And saves my volatile creations,
And say a word to you, and then
And say: now that man was a poet!
And scarcely out of child’s attire,
And scare a flock of wild ducks resting:
And scatter caustic words of wit,
And seems a faithful illustration
And, seeping through the topmost summits
And seized him by the collar, then
And set them duelling for their life,
And set upon an oil-cloth board.
And shamelessly repeats the fable
And she, as if by fire seared,
And she, from whom the model’s taken
And she’s exposed to the misshapen
And, shortly, by the force of things,
And signed with toute &#224; vous, Annette;
And silvers midst the fields and leas,
And simply had to be delayed
‘And since I held you – all those years!’
23. And since I pulled you by the ears: A slightly altered quotation from Griboyedov’s Woe from Wit, a recurrent source for this chapter, starting with the epigraph.
‘And since I pulled you by the ears!’
‘And since with gingerbread I plied you!’
And singing by decree a merry,
And slipped through night’s transparency,
And smile with malice unintended;
And so he came to the conclusion
And so he wrote obscurely, limply
And so I lived then in Odessa…
And so in French she penned this version…
And someone’s heart it will awaken;
And something else has been decided…
And sometimes, like a simple chap,
And son of Egypt, Morali,
And soon… by a secret network
And soon, soon when the storm is done
And so on. Tanya’s reservations
And so the guests would drive away.
And so then she was called Tatiana.
And so was not surprised to greet him
And sparkling day dispels the gloom,
And speak of her with denigration
And starts his song, off-key. He’s f&#234;ted
And, stepping out at last from there,
And still in harness shivering horses
And still in harness shivering horses
And stoves with multi-coloured tiles.
And Strasbourg pie, that keeps for ever,
And stringent neighbourhood debate.
And strip the trees from root to bough.
And such simplicity were writing?
And suddenly the pack was gone;
And suddenly through trees and bushes
And swiftly to the door he flies.
And Tanya, hiding her excitement,
And Tanya learns of her intention.
And Tanya no more fears disaster,
And tears have filled her languid gaze.
And tears stream out of Tanya’s eyes.
And, terror-stricken, thought I read
And that pale half-light over all,
And that their hands would never spare
And that would not have been a lie.
And the grand cuckold, without scruple,
And their majestic periwigs.
And then a change in her behaviour:
And then a country house – where she
And then, advancing still, Onegin
And then, alone in residence,
And then at thirty married well;
And then became a proper wife.
And then, from all a heart finds tender
And then, it is to be expected
And then, to nature’s way submitting,
And the old master lived here, too.
And there, above his last remains,
And there a crouching windmill dances,
And there, among the Tatar dens…
And the rebellious science was slow
And there has gained pre-eminence.
And there, in tears, he wrote another
And there is heard the source’s sound –
11. And there it is – public opinion: Pushkin’s note 38: ‘A verse of Griboyedov’s.’ The verse comes from the comedy Woe from Wit (finished, but not published, in 1824) by Alexander Griboyedov (1795–1829) in which the hero, Chatsky, is hounded by the rumour that he is mad. Only fragments of the play were published during the author’s lifetime. The whole play, still with cuts, appeared posthumously in 1833. Pushkin knew it from manuscripts which were widely circulated. The fact that Pushkin has not italicized the quotation means that he has assimilated it to his own viewpoint rather than treating it as a comment from outside.
And there it is – public opinion!
And there Mashuk, now turning green,
And there resides in it true pride
And there shone copycat Knyazhnin.
And they are burdensome enough.
And they rejoin the waltz, unheeding;
And thinks, with sadness overclouded:
And thirty kinds of brush to clean
And this Fifth Chapter I shall cleanse
And this new strophe that I nurse
And those tenebrous linden ways
And thoughts about her would enliven
And thoughts? But now with grim impatience,
And through them runs a seething torrent,
And thus more surely we undo her
And thus the two of them grew older
And tittle-tattle, who confided
And, to be frank, from them I fled,
And, to dispel her dreadful sorrow,
And to her doll with gravity
And to her sister nothing said.
And to his stand the cabman’s crawling,
And to it he by slow degrees
And torn asunder is her breast.
And to success makes no pretence;
And to the empty courtyard goes.
And to these crazy feasts she brought
And to us rhymesters bellow: ‘Cease
And to your judgement I shall bow.
And treating me with animus,
And troikas tireless and intrepid,
And truffles, young men’s luxury,
And turn from it in shame and horror;
And Twelfth Night evenings dark and close.
And two, three novels of the hour,
And, understanding nothing, she
And, up the chimney, pipe smoke rises.
And uttering an ardent vow
And very glad to change his lot
And view Tatiana as a bride;
And village quacks stood by his side.
And virtue gained a worthy crown.
And virtuous mother, if I chose.
And volume three of Marmontel.
And walked him in the Summer Park.
And wanders lonely in the woods.’
And was a great economist.
And was it from their parts perchance;
And was not tempted to mislead her;
And was requited… Eyes asunder,
And weary footmen still are sleeping
And weary footmen still are sleeping
And we as an absurdity
And, weeping, by exhaustion hit,
And wept a long time, copiously.
And we’re… in no way fashionable,
And Werther, martyr to his passion,
And what if youth in turn is driven
And what the monde thinks is enough…
And, when her little ring appears,
And when the cheerful, glass-like waters
And when the precious compilation
And where I left my heart interred.
And where’s her sister now? Where, too,
And whispered words of hope to me?
And who appeared beside the river?
And who ensured he did not lose
And why they can dispense with gold,
And win you, in society,
And, with a bow, place in your keeping…
And with a melancholy sough
And with a Russian hammer treat
And with a smile my Muse was greeted;
And with a stocking in his hand.
And, with a sudden epigram,
And, with a swish, the curtains soar.
And with a tender heart’s vibration?
And with each one set us the task
And, with her gaudy mantle fluttering,
And, with my disabused lorgnette
And with the large-grained salt of banter
And, with your trusty staff, let me
22. And wonders: ‘How did Olga suffer?’: It is Pushkin who is doing the wondering, since the townswoman has no idea who Olga, Tatiana and Onegin are.
And wonders: ‘How did Olga suffer?
And worldly noise and glitter still
And would be happy… if I could!
And yawned, as he prepared ahead
And yawns, exclaiming with dismay:
And yet her nightmare does foretell
And yet how happy was my Eugene –
And yet – she found a secret pleasure
And yet she is unhappy, parted
‘And yet that time was so auspicious
And you at least respected me
And you’ll imagine in each place
And you, mammas, pay more attention,
And you, most cherished ruminations,
And you, my true ideal – now gone,
And you, my youthful inspiration.
And you’re my guardian till the grave…
And you were right regarding me,
An edifying novel on
A neighbour comes in, whom I corner,
An enterprise that’s bold, I know it,
An epigram I’d fain resort to,
An epigram might serve it better…)
An evening gloom accumulates…
A new landowner, at that moment,
Anger alone has marked this face…
An honoured citizen backstage,
An hour or two they go on driving
An impish household lad who’s chosen
(An inclination like a fever
An incorrect and careless patter,
An inexact delivery
An Introduction’s here, though late.
An irritable gentleman,
Anisya promptly came to meet her,
A noisy crowd of serf boys fly
An old interior or a new.
An old man in the old way joking:
31. an old man: Vyazemsky suggested that this is the poet Ivan Dmitriyev (see epigraph).
A noted wit, late from Tambov, clad
A NOTE ON THE MAP
A Note on the Translation
A Note on the Translation
Another captured her attention,
Another character arrives.
Another disenchanting him,
Another memory comes, revealing
Another!… No, I’d not have given
Another’s flattering intervention
Another’s grief or ecstasy,
Another slyly smiled, unworried,
Another with a cockerel’s head,
A Novel in Verse
A Novel in Verse
A novel of the ancient kind
An unrewarded appetite;
Any old how was quite unsound,
15. Aonia’s maids: The Muses in Greek mythology. Aeonia was a region of ancient Boeotia, containing the mountains of Helicon and Cithaeron, sacred to the Muses.
A pallid swarm of invalids,
A paltry phantom or a joke,
A parody, when said and done?
A passing snowstorm overhead
A path across a snow-filled glade.
A pattern spreading out before me.
A pedant, yet an able lad.
A perilous and tiny bridge
A person by the Muse protected,
A person’s liberty and rights
A piercing cry, the hut is shaking,
A playful tune that goes on ringing
A pleasant, languid belle in fashion!
A pledge of beauty and the good,
A pond beneath dense willow trees
Apparently half-crane, half-cat?
Appearance, his extinguished look,
Appeared as an enticing riddle,
Appeared bizarre. With apprehension
Appeared to him and would not fade,
Appeared to him a novelty;
Appearing sombre and to mope,
Applause all round. Onegin enters,
Appraise my nonsense by its style.
Approaches Olga. Rapidly,
A predetermined hour will tell
A predetermined hour will tell
3. Apuleius: Lucius Apuleius, Roman author (c. AD125–180), whose fantastic and erotic tale The Golden Ass was popular in the eighteenth century in Russia. Pushkin read it in French.
A pure, effusive declaration;
A radiant prospect, undiscovered;
Are all your kindred healthy, well?
Are bogus shame and lack of pride.
Are charming, friends, I do agree,
Are covered by the blizzard’s sweep
Are creatures that you cannot measure,
Are deafened by the howling strings.
Are drumming sermons into us,
Are filled… Night comes, the moon’s patrolling
Are flashing without affectation.
Are friends of amorous reverie.
Are lost of an uplifting voice,
A rendezvous before the duel,
Are no more than a tool for us,
Aren’t you my early little bird!
Are out of fashion nowadays.
Are resurrected by the spring,
Are set above the rushing water –
Are still not Russian words today.
Are still. Unable to ignore him,
A restless spirit took him over,
Are welcomed with solicitation,
Are you the same? Have others taken
Are you the same? Have others taken
A riding crop upon a chaise
Arising as the sun is dawning,
Armed with a blunted cue, he stations
Armed with lorgnette, set off to know it,
Armenian, ponderous Moldavian
48. Armida: Chief heroine of the epic poem La Gerusalemme liberata (Liberated Jerusalem, 1580) by Torquato Tasso (1544–95), here meaning an enchantress.
Arms crossed, a cast-iron statuette
Around a table monsters sit,
Around its magic brooklets presses
Around the hostess, light remarks
Arouses her, and in the shadows
Arrange a breakfast for the three,
Arranged a s&#233;ance all night through;
Arranged in alphabetic order,
Arrayed in torn kaftan and glasses,
Arrested by their special charm.
Arriving from all sides to call,
Arriving home, he first inspected
Arriving in the town, our poet,
2. A ruler… those years ago: Pushkin’s attitude to Alexander I changed over the years as the latter became more reactionary. ‘Those years ago’ refers to the defeats of 1805–7, at Austerlitz and Eylau, when Alexander signed the humiliating Tilsit peace treaty with Napoleon.
A ruler, timorous and wily,
A Russian N just like a French one
A sage in rural isolation,
A salon damasked floor to ceiling,
A sandy, sloping eminence,
As an example of what literary criticism could get up to at the time, Pushkin was ridiculed by his chief enemy, the government spy Faddei Bulgarin, for introducing a beetle in Chapter VII:
As a provincial miss, revealing
As artless as the poet’s way,
As at a vexing separation,
As bygone sins of youth, no worse
A scandalmonger, seasoned cheat,
As castles should be: solid-based,
As charming as a lover’s kisses,
As children thronged and women cried
As early as Chapter III of Onegin Pushkin announces that he might give up poetry for prose. At this moment in the story he is responding to the harmful effect of Western novels and tales upon Tatiana. In the place of these he proposes to write an idyllic novel about innocent love and the ancient ways of Russia, but does no such thing, instantly returning to his heroine’s romantic agony. Towards the end of Chapter VI, as he contemplates his passing youth, he considers again the abandonment of poetry:
A seasoned maid, not married off,
A second and a third he sends,
10. a second crown: The first crown is the wedding crown.
As empty playthings, unengrossing,
As for his wife, she’d also gone
As giddy hope, towards him flying,
As have their famed red heels affixed
6. as he fattened: The Russian says simply: And the fatter, the heavier’, but it seems likely that the reference is to Alexander, whose personal fatness’ after victory creates greater heaviness’ for the Russian people.
As he recounted their abatement.
As if a chasm, black and frightful,
As if a cold hand pressed her heart,
As if asleep at some encampment,
As if by thunder struck. In what
As if she were deciphering spells.
As if some business they’d rehearsed.
As if there’s some big funeral;
As if the two had never met,
As if we were no longer able
As if with armour plated down.
A sign of the desire to govern,
(A simile for – please invent).
A simple monument is laid.
A simple, Russian family,
A simple soul, not seeking glory,
As in a feud of generations
A skeleton, august and formal,
Askew, his double eyeglass centres
A skull is perched with scarlet cap,
As leaves, in putrid autumn, fade.
A slender European carriage,
A slipper or a magazine.
A small-tailed dwarf, and what is that,
A smile alights upon her lips.
A smile among the guests, seduced
As much of dishes, feasts and cork,
9. as Nabokov has shown: See his Commentary, Eugene Onegin: A Novel in Verse, vol. 2, pp. 387–9.
A solemn monument proclaims:
A song is sung of bygone years:
A soul. A door he opens… what
A Southern winter’s counterfeit,
A splendid house is brightly lit,
As Sadi once said in a note.
As she departs in yellow shawl.
As she looked out and watched the moon…
Assigned their place from entrance-hall
As smoke across an azure heaven,
As soon as on the carriage way
As surely as… their little feet.
As surely as… their little feet.
A stable, fence and kitchen range.
A stallion from the Don would meet him
A standing deer with antlers bent;
A starry choir from heaven flows
A steadfast friend, a squire grown tamer,
As though she’d heard a harsh rebuke.
As through a frozen pane the light
As, tightening the leather leads,
A stranger, an anomaly.
Astride a spider sits a crab,
A string of chords, no more assaying,
A subject not concerning us.
A substitute for happiness.
A substitute for lamplight’s blur.
A sudden ceasing of the chatter;
A sudden flame consumes the maiden,
A sudden gust of wind blows, lashing
A sudden light, and in alarm
A sudden tempest of sensation
A sudden thought came, overpowering…
A surge of passion suffocates her;
A swarm of youthful, female traitors,
(As was the case in years departed,
A sweet and sinless fantasy.
As what will he appear now? Melmoth?
As with old friends Tatiana hastens
As you did, Homer, bard divine
At any novel at your leisure,
At a reception he attends,
At a soir&#233;e. ‘My God, to her!
At boxes, at the tiers he gazes;
At Christmas visit or, if not,
A tear to dim her tender eyes
At either turbulent Nikita’s
12. A temple or a thigh to claim: The duellist would aim at his opponent’s leg if he wished to satisfy his honour with a simple wound. He would aim at his head if he wished to kill him.
A temple or a thigh to claim.
A tender novel in this manner
A tender soul, intelligence
A tender spark, I was affected,
A terrified Tatiana hastens
At eventide, sometimes, there gathered
At first, I did not want to vex you.
At first, our Eugene made provisions
At first, she lacked the appetite,
At first, she strained and sobbed and ranted,
At first, since so dissimilar,
At first, these plots, initiated
At first, they all rode up to greet him;
At forty he’d have had the gout,
At high speed by the shortest way.
At him… and whatsoever shakes
A thing of note she soon discovered
At home or homewards, at all stages
A thoughtful sadness in her look
A thud of hoofs!… Her blood is shaking.
A tiny foot inside my hand.
At last he wakes, prepares to rise,
At last saw high society.
At last she softly speaks again:
At last there thunders the finale;
At least, by a more tender word
At least by showing some compassion,
At least three hours he spent preparing
At Lensky’s premature demise.
At looking wise and listening,
At once, a Veuve Cliquot or Mo&#235;t,
At once, by hinting, to deplore
At once this masquerade, this splendour,
At once towards the girl incline
20. A trader’s youthful wife: Probably Amalia Riznich, one of Pushkin’s Odessa loves.
A trader’s youthful wife, reclining,
A trading spirit rules right through.
A train of malice, spite and slander!
A troika of roan horses wheel
A tryst to which you’re always turning;
At seeming always to be curious,
At setting ladies’ smiles aflame.
At Shrovetide they’d be entertaining
At some dull aunt’s, sat by the girl
At stations fleas and bedbugs preying
Attended to his every word.
At that time we became companions.
At times judiciously keep mum
At touching lightly on a thing,
At twenty was a blade or swell
At whom no jealous ladies aim
At Zeus’s tempest-bringing pleasure,
Audacious, tender, highly wrought?
Aurora-like but rosier,
21. Ausonia: Italy.
Ausonia’s sons are gently singing
10. automedons: Ironic reference to Achilles’ charioteer in the Iliad.
A vast, neglected garden nursed
Avenge himself on every hand.
A verselet, villainously ribald.
A voguish rhymester’s calvary,
A voguish song devoid of reason,
Awaited Lensky’s exaltations.
Awaits the answer fretfully;
Awaits us all beyond the grave.
Awakened at her usual time,
Awaken him with a commandment:
18. ‘Away, away’: The postilion’s cry to pedestrians.
Away now to the turnpike pillars
A wayward, silent, sad young maiden,
A wayward spirit, never still
3. a weak imitator… Lord Byron: (Written in French: ‘un faible imitateur d’un original tres peu recommandable’), letter from Vorontsov to Count Nesselrode, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Eugene Onegin: A Novel in Verse by Aleksandr Pushkin, translated from the Russian, with a Commentary by Vladimir Nabokov (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1964), vol. 3, p. 194.
A wicket gate, a broken fence,
A wilful swarming of desires.
A window sheds illumination
A wish to travel, anywhere
A witch with bearded goat cross-bred,
A wolf and hungry she-wolf enter
A wondrous dream she has: she’s taken
A wondrous night, a moon sublime…
A wood’s before them; pines are slumbering
A word in place. Embarrassed, sullen,
A worthwhile object: surely who
A yawn with laughter he suppresses:
A young Armida’s lips or seek
A young townswoman who is spending
A youthful feast, a merry fare
A youthful lover, dreamer, poet
A youthful maid will always hasten
A youth on his nocturnal bed
Balconies, gates where lions curl,
Baratynsky
4. Barclay: Prince Mikhail Bogdanovich Barclay-de-Tolly (1761–1818) commanded the Russian armies during the first part of the war, but his policy of retreat gave rise to accusations of treachery.
Bard of The Feasts and languid sorrow,
23. Bard of The Feasts: Yevgeny Abramovich Baratynsky (1800–1844), an outstanding poet of Pushkin’s period. The Feasts was written in Finland in 1820, where he was serving as a private in the army, having been expelled from military school for theft. It evokes the ebullient days spent in St Petersburg in 1819, when he got to know Pushkin. But he was more famed as an elegiac poet.
Barely recalled their love and spite.
11. barin: Squire or landowner.
Barks, laughter, whistles, song, applause,
Base cowards and calumniators,
33. Bayle: Pierre Bayle (1647–1706), French philosopher, author of famous Dictionnaire historique et critique (Historical and Critical Dictionary, 1697).
Bayley, John, Pushkin: A Comparative Commentary (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971)
Bear in pursuit, Tatiana dashes
Beating their palms together, tire,
Beating their palms together, tire,
Beat servant girls who got her cross –
Beauties no longer claimed his passion,
Became their native one ere long?
Be carried from incarceration
Because a rash and fiery spirit,
Because grave men delight in trivia,
Because I’m wealthy and renowned,
Because my husband’s wounds in battle
Because we never tire of judging
Because we’re wont to talk forever
Be charmed by a familial picture,
Before a fire of little heat,
Before a secret, inner court
Before her Eugene stood, eyes blazing,
Before her lies a yard that’s strange,
Before her shining look they vanished,
Before her soft simplicity,
Before her soul’s vivacity!
Before him, faces come and go
Before him the Princess alone
Before me is Tatiana’s letter;
Before Onegin an insistent
Before the fire a table’s laid,
Before their hands have turned blood red,
Before the window, breathing on
Before whom Europe’s kings would fawn,
Before you know it: love’s a joke
Begging, demanding declarations,
Beginning with her cradle days,
Begins to shrill (good God!) and call:
Begins to understand – thank God! –
Beheld at morn the whitened court,
Behind the seemly crowd to go,
Behold in soul-filled flight before us
Behold in soul-filled flight before us
Behold my Eugene’s liberation:
Behold our hero at the doorway;
Be known as vulgar (I can not…
Belated repetitions, urges –
Believe me: you’d have never known
Believing in the world’s perfection;
Belonging to her lord – a ruse
Below her, from her hill, she sees
Bending her languid little head;
Beneath a backwoods porch the maiden,
Beneath his breast the blood flowed, steaming,
Beneath his daughter’s pillow dozing.
Beneath the bridal crown, head lowered,
Beneath the Finnish sky escaping,
Beneath the names already signed,
Beneath the sky of Schiller, Goethe,
Beneath this stone reposeth here.
Beneath which tiny currents wind
Bereft now of its stormy morrow!…
Beshtu, hemmed in by hills, is seen,
7. Beshtu: One of the five peaks of Besh Tau, a mountain, another one of which is Mashuk.
Beside a column, ‘twixt two aunts,
Beside an 1808 annual:
Beside his heavy wife extended.
Beside the sea on granite walls.
Beside two ancient pines umbrageous.
Besprinkling them with lemon lightly.
Bestuzhev, himself a writer, was also a Decembrist. Many Decembrists were literary men, who, like Bestuzhev, saw their craft as a means of political struggle against autocracy and serfdom and were puzzled by Pushkin’s apparent departure from the radical poems that had sent him into exile. Why was Russia’s foremost poet, they asked, wasting his talent on the trivial lives of the gentry? In 1824, four years into exile, Pushkin declared in response to the most significant of Decembrist works, Kondraty Ryleyev’s Dumy (Reflections), that the aim of poetry was poetry. In a series of poems Ryleyev had evoked heroic figures from the past as models to be followed in the present. Pushkin questioned the accuracy of Ryleyev’s work, claiming that he was on the contrary projecting present ideals into the past.
Bethea, David, Realizing Metaphors: Alexander Pushkin and the Life of the Poet (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1998)
Bethea, D. (ed.), Pushkin Today (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993).
Betoken friendship’s loyal sign.
Betokening seductive nights.
Betrayal a deliverance.
Betrayals no more entertained him,
Betrayed him to his deadly foes.
Betrays my stomach, and instead
Between a golden ananas
Between domestic work and leisure
Between the lines before him, printed,
Between the meat and blanc-manger
Between these two types – between the dedicated enthusiast and poet and, on the other hand, the weary, embittered and useless man, between Lensky’s grave and Onegin’s boredom – stretched the deep and muddy river of civilized Russia, with its aristocrats, bureaucrats, officers, gendarmes, grand-dukes and emperor – a dumb and formless mass of baseness, obsequiousness, bestiality and envy, a formless mass which draws in and engulfs everything.
8. Between these two types… engulfs everything: Russian Views of Pushkin, ed. and trans. D. J. Richards and C. R. S. Cockrell (Oxford: William A. Meeuws, 1976), p. 23.
16. ‘Between the wolf and dog’: A translation of entre chien et loup, meaning dusk or the time of day when it is too dark for a shepherd to distinguish his dog from a wolf.
‘Between the wolf and dog’ (though why it
Bewildered as the house draws close…
Bewildered by a tender shame,
Beyond the gate. After two days –
32. Bichat and Herder and Tissot: Marie Francois Xavier Bichat (1771–1802), French anatomist and physiologist. Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803), German philosopher and critic, notable collector of folk songs, and writer on history, literature and language. Simon Andre Tissot (1728–97), famous Swiss doctor, author of De la sant&#233; des gens de lettres (On the Health of Men of Letters, 1768).
Bichat and Herder and Tissot.
Bidding the monde again adieu;
Binyon, T. J., Pushkin (London: HarperCollins, 2002)
Biographies
23. blanc-manger: Nabokov writes in his Commentary: ‘blanc-manger (pronounced as in French): This almond-milk jelly (an old French and English sweet, not to be confused with our modern ‘blancmange’) might be artificially coloured. Its presence (as well as the presence of Russian champagne) at Dame Larin’s festive table stressed both the old-world style of her household and a comparative meagreness of means.
Blessings to heaven for their lot.
Blest are the cares that day contrives,
Blest comrades of humanity;
Blest he who’s given to believing,
Blest is the darkness that arrives!
Blest, too… though, maybe, while he reads,
Blest who betimes has left life’s revel,
Blest who in youth was truly youthful,
Blest who matured in proper time,
Blighting the morning of our days.
22. bloody roast beef: Fashionable in the early decades of the nineteenth century.
Bloody roast beef is there to savour,
Blossomed beneath her parents’ gaze,
Blowing its trumpet far and wide,
Blowing of noses, hissing, clapping;
Blowing of noses, hissing, clapping;
39. blue blocks of hewn-out ice: In winter huge blocks of ice were cut from the Neva to be stored in refrigerators. During the March thaw sledges would transport them to buyers.
Blue chimney smoke ascends the sky,
3. board: Pushkin omitted the rest of the stanza in the final version, though it exists in his fair copy.
21. Bogdanovich: Ippolit Fedorovich Bogdanovich (1743–1803), poet, author of Dushen’ka (1783–9), based on the story of Cupid and Psyche; regarded as the founder of light poetry’ and valued by Pushkin for opening up poetry to popular speech. His influence on Pushkin is felt in Ruslan and Lyudmila (1820).
14. Bokharans: Originating in Bokhara, Central Asia, they sold Eastern goods in Russia. Their shawls were very popular among Russian women in the 1820s.
Bold king of the satiric scene,
Bold song and horn from distant shores
16. bolivar: A silk hat with a wide, upturned brim, named after Simon Bolivar (1783–1830), the Latin American liberator and idol of European liberals in the 1820s and of Latin American revolutionaries today.
54. bon ton: The Russian has ‘higher tone’, meaning well-bred conversation and manners. A near English equivalent would be ‘good form’.
Borne to our youth by reverie.
Born to the softness of the orient,
53. boston: A member of the whist family. Russian boston differs only slightly from ordinary boston.
Boston and ancient omber call
Both with their elbows nudge Tatiana,
Boulevards and Cossack messengers,
Bows, bustle… meanwhile from the dance
Bows to the men on every side
Breaks off. Alone, the angry chorus
60. Brenta: River with Venice at its delta.
17. Br&#233;guet: A repeater watch, invented by Parisian watchmaker Abraham Louis Br&#233;guet (1747–1823). A spring mechanism allowed the watch, while shut, to strike the hour or minute. A real dandy would not have carried one.
Briefly the earth entire forgetting,
Brigade of creditors appeared,
Briggs, A. D. P., Eugene Onegin, Landmarks of World Literature Series (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992)
Bringing the meadows’ tribute home.
18. britska: A light carriage.
Broke off the chat that they’d begun
Bronzes and china on a stand,
Brothers! I must entreat your patience:
Brothers, there’s nothing that can equal
Brought all her little playmates down
Bundle us out with equal zeal!
But Adam Smith instead he relished,
But all at once without discussion
But all the time his mind’s a-whirr.
But all the titles within sight
But all they want’s a madrigal!
But all this soon came to a close:
But anecdotes he did remember
But any wish to change them now
But are these all its delectations?
But (as each rule has its exceptions)
But at a late age, dry and fruitless,
But at that moment all were taking
But at the back porch every day
But being Russian to the core,
But blest is he with modest passion,
But Br&#233;guet tells the pleasure seekers
But, brighter far than all her sisters,
But, by an empty dream’s deflection,
But by one thought he’s overtaken,
But can’t discern her fields, her meadows,
But dinner being served brings calm,
But distant hopes appear and sometimes
But does it matter? They’ll believe
But don’t refuse, please understand.’
‘But elegies don’t have a moral,
But Eugene pulls the door wide open
But Eugene’s thrifty neighbour, flurried,
But evening’s blue already thickens,
But even in those years Tatiana
But even while his eyes were reading,
But ever brighter, brighter grow…
But fie on such prosaic blather,
But first she asks whether she mightn’t
But flaming youth is quite unable
But for the moment I’ll ignore it,
But for the moment let him thrive,
But for the virginal and young
But friendship even of this order
But, gentlemen, who can define
But God did help – murmurs abated,
‘But goodness knows what sort of rabble
But gradually…
But grandmas, grandpas cannot quicken
But hammers are already cracking
‘But happiness I never aimed for,
But hark!… a crunch of snow… the maiden
But heartily her husband loved her,
But he’d no wish to undermine
But he, instead of this reception,
But he is stubborn, won’t surrender,
But he was wrong: Eugene unheeding
But he, whatever else he’d done,
But hush! I hear an awesome critic
But I am someone else’s wife,
But I feel helpless, I confess.
But if you’ve even slightly pitied
But I, in love, was stupid, mute.
But I’ll restrain myself before
But I’m a fool… for as I speak,
But in a land of mournful stone,
But in her breast there’s still the yearning,
But in small towns and country wards
But in the drawing-room such trivial
But, in the meantime, I’m not trying
But in the past Princess Alina,
8. But I seceded… fled a far: Pushkin refers here to his exile through the prism of his Romantic narrative poems, Prisoner of the Caucasus (1820–21) and The Gipsies (1824), where the hero voluntarily flees from civilization.
But I seceded from their union
But it has ended. Supper’s ready.
But it is late. A cold wind’s risen.
But it is late. Odessa’s sleeping;
But it was late, his heart was aching,
But I’ve no wish to change them yet;
But I’ve no wish to praise you; I
But I was born for peaceful pleasures,
But I… what matters this to me,
But Larina drove none too fleetly,
But… learn to govern your confessions;
But Lensky, not, of course, intending
But let me turn now to our matter.
But let’s extend congratulations
But lets it go, as I do my
But let that be: I’m in no state
But let that be! My fate is sealed,
But lo, her crimson hand extending,
But look at how the crowd is clearing,
But look, my pretty one, you’re ready!
But look, the light is vanishing.
But love and cosset with respect,
But man of honour, with a mind.
‘But meet my daughter here, Tatiana.’
But most of them with some affair.
But my Onegin? Home to bed he
But my Tatiana does not care.
But neither one fares any better.
But neither Virgil nor Racine,
But no, once more the deal’s undone.’
But no one had as yet discovered,
But not a bit of it: on spying
But nothing changes in their bearing,
But noticing the languid maid’s
But not today. Although my feeling
But nowadays all minds are clouded,
But now, as in a house forsaken,
But now, benign and simple, he
But now it bores me beyond measure.
But now its noisy effervescence
But now my mind’s grown dark and woolly:
But now, no longer at his place,
But now our roadways are decaying,
But now the door has opened quietly,
4. But now the North’s unsafe for me: Pushkin’s note 1 to the chapter reads: ‘Written in Bessarabia’, his initial place of exile.
But now the North’s unsafe for me.
But now the radiance of the calm
But now we only see in her
But now, you’re off; I’m sorry. Say,
But of those friends who, meeting, listened
But, oh my God, what desolation
But oh, my light youth, if we’re parting,
But Olga, ah, what transformations!
But Olga would not read an ode.
But, on receiving Tanya’s letter,
But onward, onward with my story!
But our time, too, is coming, coming,
But our two friends are talking here:
But own, I can’t translate it yet,
But pantalons, frac and gilet
But partiality restricted
But passable for kith and kin;
But pictures with this kind of feature
But quietly talks to nurse instead:
21. But, reader… monument is laid: This stanza is written in a traditional elegiac mode. Lensky is buried here because, as a duellist, his grave is not allowed in consecrated ground.
But, reader, we shall never know it;
But really, this is no great sorrow,
But sad is he who lacks illusion,
But scarcely lost in sleep’s enchantment,
But she, alas, was slow of wit.
But she – my lyre dares not disquiet her
But she, not noticing her sister,
But short-lived summer’s taking flight.
But silent glances in the end
But simply, friends, to you relate
But so as to prolong my stay,
But so be it – let your affection
But somehow what enchant me more are
But soon a drift began to quiver
But soon her lifeless eyes she lowers
But soon the guests by small gradations
But sparks of quite another brightness,
But still, it seems, I should delight
But stop, enough, I beg of you,
But stop. It’s time now I translated
But sudden fear assailed Tatiana…
But summer in our North is merely
‘But surely you don’t love the younger?’
But surfaced roads on every hand
But Tanya finds her antics galling.
But Tanya, just as if she sleeps,
But Tanya simply could not cry,
But tea is brought; the dainty maidens
But ten strikes, he’s already mounting
But thank the Lord, you’re well and steady!
But that will do. I much prefer
But then a clink of spurs resounded,
But then again the poet’s portion
But the princess, so very different,
But there is no escaping him.
But there’s one coxcomb in dejection
But they are close now, and their horses
But they were all unanimous:
But this grand game, once so paraded
But to continue with our story:
But to detail the consequences
But to the challenge dared not rise,
But, turning morning into nighttime,
But way back I was very smart,
But welcome you without pretension.
But we, young fellows, blithely standing
But what a dull consortium,
But what did I, amazed, discover?
But what the world cannot abide
But when they’re ready to depart,
But when young Eugene reached the morrow
But where he showed true erudition,
But where Melpomene is uttering
But where much sooner shines the spring
But where now is my rambling story?
But where’s Onegin? By the way,
But where, time was, I might discover
But while her mind is in the distance,
But who in this august collection
‘But who is she?’ ‘My wife, dear friend.’
But why should I think it my duty
But will and reason bring restraint;
But, with a sudden burst of flame,
But with his heart held in a fetter,
But with the past, Muse, let me part.
But you are weary from your travels;
But you, blest husbands, you remained
But you look pale again, not better.’
(But you must know him well enough);
But you, O miscellaneous volumes
But you’re not listening now, I fear.’
‘But you seem worse.’ ‘The same old thing.
‘Buyanov courted her – no fear.
Buyanov whirls off Pustyakova,
By a deserted lake I ponder
By Aeolus wafted hither thither;
‘By all means, but (I’d like to know it),
By ancient limes, by rivulet;
By birth Pushkin was deeply embedded in Russian history. On his father’s side he could boast a 600-year lineage as a nobleman. On his mother’s he was the great-grandson of an African princeling, stolen from the harem at Constantinople for Peter the Great, under whose tutelage he rose to the rank of general. The features of Gannibal, as he was called, still showed in his great-grandson, whose African roots gave him the romantic feeling of an outsider wanting to get back to his native land (Chapter I, stanza 50). But Pushkin was equally attached to Peter, who played a dominant part in his outlook and work (see The Bronze Horseman (1833) and Poltava (1828–9)). At the same time he was envious of the new aristocracy who owed their advancement to Peter (and then to Catherine), ousting the older nobility to which his family, on his father’s side, belonged. Unloved as a child, he found a new family in his lyc&#233;e, where he made lasting friendships. He was famed for his love poetry, but friendship nevertheless remained his chief value, as Onegin attests, where friends form an invisible audience or enter directly into the novel.
By candlelight from bed she’d climb.
By chance his verse can still be read now,
By children and a faithful wife,
By children’s games was not beguiled
By chill corruption not yet blighted,
By Eugene’s speech, but I grew used
By Eugene’s unexpected call,
By Europe all things are invaded,
By falling from his Kalmuck steed
By fate united to this stranger:
By Fortune’s smile intoxicated,
By girlish pupils, still afraid.
By hearing all the same objections,
By her the poet first was given
By his fastidious poise and carriage,
By-jowl with Frenchman, Spaniard, Greek,
By kinsfolk, then, is meant ideally:
By lethargy are overcome,
By life we both had been oppressed;
By lofty Zeus’s will the heir
By music’s thunder animated,
By name Vladimir Lensky, wholly
By Olga’s smile invigorated,
By one thing for a while enchanted,
By post congratulate the lot,
By private horse or postal chaise,
By Providence’s dispensation
By Providence’s dispensation
Byron
By sleigh, past the Neva he flies.
By some foul liar in a garret
By the Neva, where maybe you
By the Neva, where maybe you
By turns attentive and dismissive!
By turns, Tatiana’s moaning, sighing,
By undermining predilections,
By way of a green meadow plying,
Call for Mo&#235;na (in a word,
Calls for a horse, and, full of gall,
Can bring him back. The youthful bard
‘Can it be possible?’ thinks Eugene
‘Can it be she? But no… and yet…
Can she have found the fitting ‘word’?
Can she have solved Onegin’s puzzle?
Can’t be brought back and that I’m near
Can you be paltry feeling’s slave?
Capricious ladies of society!
56. Capricious ladies… spleen: In note 7 Pushkin remarks: ‘The whole of this ironic strophe is nothing other than a subtle form of praise for our fair compatriots. So Boileau, in the guise of reproach, praises Louis XIV. Our ladies combine enlightenment with amiability, and strict purity of morals with that Eastern charm that so captivated Mme de Sta&#235;l (see Dix ans d’exil).’ Posthumously published in 1818, the latter work describes de Sta&#235;l’s visit to Russia in 1812.
Carafes each morning chez V&#233;ry.
1. Carbonari: Literally, ‘charcoal burners’, a group of secret societies in France, Italy and Spain that aimed to overturn the forces of Restoration after the defeat of Napoleon.
Carefree, I’d sing of my ideal,
Cares not a bit (such is their sex).
Caricatures of every guest.
Carried away a holy secret,
Carrying tea upon a tray.
10. cartel: A written challenge which the duellist’s second delivers to the former’s opponent. Lensky’s second is Zaretsky.
Cascade and flow and incandesce,
18. casino: Pushkin spells ‘casino in Western letters. It was called ‘casino de commerce, where not only gambling, but all manner of financial transactions took place, and it doubled as a ballroom.
Cast boredom, languor in like measure
Cast by the poet’s destiny;
Cast eyes on Tanya priggishly
Casting my mind into the distance,
Catch at his coat tails suddenly
Caught by a schoolboy, frolicking;
Caught by a schoolboy, frolicking;
Causing with feigned despair alarm,
Cerused still is Lukerya Lvovna,
42. Chaadaev: Pyotr Chaadaev (1794–1856), dandy and libertarian thinker, later a mystic, influenced the young Pushkin, famous for his later Philosophical Letters, contrasting Russian history unfavourably with the West, with which Pushkin disagreed. The journal carrying the first Letter was suppressed, Chaadaev being declared insane and placed under house arrest.
31. Chamfort: S&#233;bastien Roch Nicolas Chamfort (1741–94), author of Maximes et Pens&#233;es (Maxims and Thoughts, 1803). Pushkin liked his aphorisms.
Champion of rights and liberty,
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
(Chapter II, stanza 38)
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
(Chapter I, stanzas 19–20)
(Chapter I, stanza 2)
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER I
Chapters VII and VIII present a post-Decembrist world full of nonentities with the exception of his poet friend Vyazemsky, who comforts an unhappy Tatiana on her entry into the monde – the same Vyazemsky from whom the epigraph to Chapter I is taken. Both Tatiana and Onegin are hopelessly isolated in this new milieu, despite the former’s well-schooled endeavours to behave comme il faut, which, as she confesses to Onegin, are a pretence. The term ‘prose’ refers not only to language, but to the prosaic world of Russia at all its levels. In Onegin Pushkin turned this prose into a new kind of poetry.
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
(Chapter VII, stanza 22)
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
(Chapter VI, stanza 21)
(Chapter VI, stanza 29)
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
1. Chapter X: Pushkin composed this politically explosive chapter in 1830, but burned most of it. Historical in character, it has nothing to do with the previous narrative, although there is evidence to suggest that Onegin might turn up, possibly as a Decembrist.
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER 1
Charmed us… but what is more delighting
Chased by the vernal beams, already
Chasing his love, and, in a bound,
2. Chateaubriand: Fran&#231;ois-Ren&#233; de Chateaubriand (1768–1848), French Romantic writer and politician, author of the novel Ren&#233; (1802).
Cheerful he was – about to marry.
23. cherished… perished: Pushkin’s stock rhyme here is in Russian ‘sladost’/‘mladost’, ‘sweetness’/‘youth’ (he employs an archaic word for ‘youth’). I have substituted ‘cherish’/‘perish’ because these are hackneyed Romantic terms in English and are often used by Pushkin.
Cherries bright and raspberries,
44. Chevalier Gardes: A privileged regiment of heavy cavalry created under Paul I to counterbalance the already existing Horse Guards regiment. Chevaliers Gardes were distinguished by their tall height and embroidered uniforms. However, in a manuscript note Pushkin mentions that in fact they wore court dress and shoes, but he included the spurs to give the picture a poetic touch.
6. chez V&#233;ry: Pushkin’s note 37: A Parisian restaurateur.
Chieftain of rakes, a pub declaimer,
52. Childe Harold: The disillusioned and languid hero of Byron’s first great narrative poem, Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage (1813), which brought him fame.
Childe Harold to a T, Onegin
Chronology
Chronology
4. Cicero: Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 BC), renowned Roman writer, politician and thinker.
8. Circe: Sorceress in Homer’s Odyssey who turns men into swine. Here the meaning is coquette’.
11. Clarissa: Heroine of Richardson’s Clarissa Harlowe (1748).
Clarke, Roger, Eugene Onegin and Four Tales from Russia’s Southern Frontier: A Prisoner in the Caucasus, The Fountain of Bachchisaray, Gipsies, Poltava (Herts: Wordsworth Classics, 2005). Translated into English prose with an Introduction and Commentary
Clayton, J. D., Ice and Flame: Aleksandr Pushkin’s ‘Eugene Onegin’ (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985)
Clearly he saw he could not keep
Clenching her teeth, remaining steady,
27. Cleopatra, Phaedra… Mo&#235;na: It is unclear what work Cleopatra figured in. Phaedra: heroine of an opera adapted from Racine’s eponymous tragedy. Mo&#235;na: heroine of Ozerov’s tragedy Fingal.
Climbs on his sleigh and clears a spot;
Closed his left eye, as he took aim –
Closer! Into the yard they race.
Clothed even hopeless egotism
27. clubber: The reference is to the prestigious English club, a private establishment founded in 1770, famed for its good food and gambling.
Coffee with Eastern grounds I’d prize,
Cognizance of a pie in sight
Collapsing at her feet with love.
Collecting books, he stacked a shelfful,
Collective song (aimed to prevent
Combs, little files of steel, and scissors,
Come, heartfelt friend, come, longed-for friend,
21. comet wine: Champagne of vintage comet year 1811.
Come, you maidens beauteous,
Communicated to my mind,
Companion of my youthful days,
Companion of so many seasons,
Compare with nature’s animation
Compassion, righteous indignation,
1820 Completed first major narrative poem, Ruslan and Lyudmila. Exiled to south for a handful of ‘liberal’ verses on freedom, serfdom and autocracy.
Conceited, haughty and indifferent
Concern for guests and their provision,
15. Concerning the eighth chapter… impoverished: N. L. Brodsky, Evgeny Onegin Roman A. S. Pushkina (Moscow: Gosudarstvennoye Uchebno-Pedagogicheskoye Izdatel’ stvo Ministerstva Prosveshcheniya RSFSR, 1957), p. 337.
Concerning the eighth chapter of Onegin, I heard from the late poet in 1832 that besides the Nizhny market and the Odessa port, Eugene saw the military settlements organized by Count Arakcheyev, and here occurred remarks, judgements, expressions that were too violent for publication and he decided were best assigned to eternal oblivion. Therefore, he discarded the whole chapter from his tale – a chapter that after cancellation has become too short and, so to speak, impoverished.
Concluding vale to a letter;
Confirmed he was by all condemned.
Confronted Eugene all alone.
Confronts a frigid audience,
Conjecture followed on conjecture,
Conquests, their own and those of others,
Consider its caprices, surges,
Constrained her youthful breast; her soul
Consulted not another text.
Consumed with pain and lassitude,
Consumes and drinks enough for two.
Contented with his lot, at once
Contented with their festive labours,
Contents
Content with vengeance satisfied,
Continued to inflict distress
Continues to repose in languor,
Continue to disturb my heart.
Conveys it with solemnity.
Coquettes are cool in their decisions.
18. Coquettes… more assuredly: An imitation of the French poet Evariste de Parny’s ‘La Main’ (‘The Hand’). Parny (1753–1814) was renowned for his elegant love poetry. See lines 13–14 of stanza 29.
Coquettes – to drown the notoriety
Coquettish rhyme the years are spurning;
Coquettish rhyme the years are spurning;
Corsair, retired now from the sea.
15. Cossack messengers: Cossacks were employed to take errands by horse.
Could be more lovable than you?
Could drink a bottle of champagne,
Could it be love, that youthful pain?
Could it be she, the same Tatiana,
Could it be she who, now so bold,
Could judge his gifts and quality,
Could make his love return again,
Could not conceive how solemn Grimm
Could not eclipse her fellow guest,
Could simply not be separated.
Could take the place of happiness.
Could turn out something elevated,
Could weather, yearly, life’s bleak clime,
Could well forgo the vanities
Could you devise for me a way
Creative dreams are more alive.
Creature of heaven or of hell,
Cries out Dame Larina, and fast
Critical Works on Eugene Onegin
Crockery, plates and covers clatter
17. Crosses where flocks of jackdaws swirl: According to the censor, the Metropolitan of Moscow took offence at Pushkin’s reference. The censor replied that, as far as he knew, jackdaws did indeed alight on church crosses, but that this was a matter for the Chief of Police, who allowed this to happen. The complaint went to the Tsar’s minister, Count Benkendorf, who politely advised the Metropolitan not to meddle in trivialities beneath his dignity.
Crosses where flocks of jackdaws swirl.
Cross with the tea – too sweet a liquid –
Crunches the snow in hurried flight.
Crushed by the utterance, walks off, quaking,
Cry: ‘Drop your wreath of elegies,
Cups clash; the sleepy marker comes
Currants red we’ll also throw,
Cursing his crazy self-deception;
Custom no longer favours Latin:
Custom’s a despot and prevails.
Cutting the ice, reverberates;
Dalton-Brown, S., Pushkin’s ‘Evgenii Onegin’ (London: Bristol Classical Press, 1997)
Dance the mazurka, treading light
Dare breach the cumulative silts;
Dared clean his nails in front of him,
Dark, fir, a forest, hedgehog, witch
Dark flow of fragrant tea already
Daybreak, from valleys large and small,
Daydreams will court your every pace,
Days filled with indolence and ardours
Dead ashes cannot be replenished,
Dear companions, near to us,
Dear fellow, Olga’s in her prime,
Dear friends, do you remember that?
Deceit or falsehood and for craving
Dedication
DEDICATION
Delicate patterns on the windows,
Delight in grove or hill or pasture;
7. de Linar: ‘Hero of baroness Kr&#252;dener’s delightful tale,’ notes Pushkin. The tale in question is Valerie, ou Lettres de Gustave de Linar &#224; Ernest de G. (Valerie, or Letters from Gustave de Linar to Ernest de G., 1803). Mme von Kr&#252;dener (1764–1824) was a German novelist and mystic who wrote in French. De Linar, a dark-haired and violent young Swede, is the unrequited lover of Countess Val&#233;rie (probably from Livonia), who, like Julie in La Nouvelle H&#233;lo&#239;se (see note 5 above), remains faithful to her older husband. She marries at fourteen and meets de Linar at sixteen.
10. Delphine: Eponymous heroine of Mme de Sta&#235;l’s novel Delphine (1802). It has been suggested, but not accepted, that the Delphine mentioned by Pushkin belongs to a story by Marmontel, L’Ecole de l’amiti&#233; (School of Friendship, 1792), translated in 1822 by Nikolai Karamzin (1766–1826), an important predecessor of Pushkin. In Mme. de Sta&#235;l’s novel Delphine is a widow of twenty-one whose admirer she gives up out of consideration for his wife.
14. Delvig: Baron Anton Delvig (1798–1831), a minor poet, one of Pushkin’s closest friends and a classmate at the lyc&#233;e.
15. Demon: A reference to Pushkin’s poem ‘The Demon’ (1824).
Departs when lively youth has fled.
Depart then, newborn work this hour,
Departure has been long extended,
Depicting in his fiery lay
24. Der Freisch&#252;tz: Opera by Carl Maria von Weber (1786–1826), a popular import when Pushkin was writing his third chapter.
5. Derzhavin: Gavrila Derzhavin (1743–1816), Russia’s first outstanding poet. As a schoolboy, Pushkin enthralled the ancient man with his recitation of his poem Recollections at Tsarskoe Selo’ at a public examination at the lyc&#233;e in 1815.
Descends with sunny sparkles glittering.
Designed for comfort, unaffected,
Desires, dreams, sorrows kept invading
Destined the children’s wedding day.
Detesting a coquette so cruel,
Diana’s breast, the cheeks of Flora,
45. Diana: Virgin goddess of the moon in ancient Rome.
Diaphanously light, is draping
33. Didelot: Charles Louis Didelot (1767–1837), well-known ballet master in St Petersburg.
Did I not spend my happiest days
Did not remain uncastigated,
Did they not try, with much travail,
Did you devote its melodies?
Dig daring tunnels under waters,
Directed at her every minute
Disburdened of the world’s opinions,
Discernible in moonlight beams.
Discerns my physiognomy
Discloses Olga, then Vladimir;
Discover life’s felicities,
Discrepancies – and there are many,
Discrepancies – and there are many,
Discuss the pacts of vanished nations,
Disdainful and in languid pose,
Dishevelled. She proceeded.
Displayed such health and levity?
Disputing in indecent haste.
Disquiet, he, with lowered gaze,
Disreputable journal flitting,
Distresses her and makes her wonder,
Disturb my soul, disturb my blood!
Disturb the sleep my soul enjoys.
Diverting the lethargic eye.
1. Dmitriyev… Baratynsky… Griboyedov: The first epigraph is from Ivan Dmitriev’s (1760–1837) poem The Liberation of Moscow (1795), the second from Baratynsky’s The Feasts, the third from Griboyedov’s Woe from Wit. Dmitriev’s poem is an official ode. Baratynsky’s gives an ironic representation of private mores. Griboyedov’s play, banned by the censor, is a biting satire on Moscow social life. Together they symbolize three contradictory aspects of contemporary Moscow.
Dmitriyev
Does all that gladdens, animates,
Does not appeal to you at all,
Does not withdraw her hand unfeeling
Dogs, barking, hurtle out toward her
Don fetters to defend his honour,
Do not be cross with me, my soul,
Do not come and eavesdrop on
Do not come and spy upon
Do not reflect Diana’s light;
‘Don’t think.… who knows?… perhaps suspicion…
Do-re-mi-sol in terms of wine?
Downhill, scarce breathing, round her glancing,
Down lilac bushes as she hurries;
Down the surrounding hills the snow
Dozed in the moon’s inspiring light.
Dressed like a London dandy, he
Dried up and egotistical,
Dried up and egotistical,
Drinks only red wine by the glass;
Drives home from this domestic scene.
Drives out and strolls, at leisure swanning,
Drives out to join a masquerade.
Drives sleepily through city streets,
Drunk as a swine, this precious hostage
Drunk, eaten, moped, declined, got stout
Dryads, in pensive mood immersed.
Dull shore that gives me no delight,
Each bustles, lies enough for two –
Each, cool and silent, must commence
Each day is dear, each hour too:
Each day met riding. Soon the men
Each day up to her porch he ventures,
Each time I prayed in hope of cheering
Each took his pistol to the place.
Each waited for the machinations
Each wanting something different cleared:
Earth’s tribute ready to be paid.
Eavesdropping on the heart’s first sound,
Eccentric, sad, exuding danger,
Eccentric’s rushing to his lady,
1811–17 Educated at newly opened Imperial Lyc&#233;e at Tsarskoe Selo. First poetry (earliest publication 1814).
Eight rubbers; and as many times,
EISBN: 9781101488614
Either the pensive vampire or
Elderly dames who looked ferocious;
Elle &#233;tait fille, elle &#233;tait amoureuse.
1. Elle &#233;tait fille… Malfil&#226;tre: ‘She was a girl, she was in love.’ A line from Narcisse, ou l’&#238;le de Venus (Narcissus, or the Island of Venus, 1768), a posthumous poem in four cantos by the second-rate French poet Jacques Charles Louis Clinchamp de Malfil&#226;tre (1733–67), probably taken by Pushkin from Laharpe’s anthology of ancient and modern literature used at Pushkin’s lyc&#233;e.
Else mother-in-law would have driven
Elsewhere she scarcely wastes her breath;
Elton, a professor of English who taught himself Russian, had family roots in the landed gentry, and Johnston was a diplomat married into the Russian aristocracy. The latter’s verse novella Talk About the Last Poet (1981) recalls a vanishing idyll set in France during the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West. In his Preface he insists that he feels no nostalgia about the more immediate demise of the British Empire, and yet, with evident approval, quotes a ‘distinguished critic’ who describes him as its ‘last poet’. Does not a similar hankering take him to Onegin, likewise an idyll destroyed? Johnston is not as backward-looking as Elton but, like him, though certainly not to the same extent, he poeticizes Pushkin’s language, blurring its precision.
Elucidating Say and Bentham,
47. Elvina: Conventional name in erotic poetry of the time.
Embark upon their fateful meeting,
Embellished by slight calumnies,
Embracing, they would weep… but now
Embroidery seemed made of riddles;
Employing an enchanting pen,
Empty and gloomy dreams to rest;
Empty in spirit and alone,
Enchanting wondrously her mind.
Enchanting world! There shone Fonvizin,
Enclosed him in his gloomy den.
Encourage two young friends to strife
14. encyclopedia of Russian life: V. G. Belinsky, Polnoye sobraniye sochinenii (Moscow: Academy of Sciences, USSR, 1953–7), vol. 7, p. 503.
Endeavouring to catch her eye.
Ending his brilliant, wild career
1. Endowed with G&#246;ttingenian soul: G&#246;ttingen university, where Lensky studied, was one of the most liberal universities, not just in Germany, but in Europe as a whole. Situated on Hanoverian territory, it was subject to English law. The future Decembrists N. I. Turgenev and Pyotr Kaverin (see Chapter I, stanza 16, and note 20) studied there.
Endowed with G&#246;ttingenian soul, he
Engaged in amicable chat
Engendered much self-accusation:
Engender in his soul compassion:
Engross so much a woman’s mood:
Enjoyed a bath with ice on waking,
Enlightenment we don’t believe in,
Enlivened by the spring’s returning,
Ennui!
Enough, dear chap… the family’s well
Enough for fate to take its due.
‘Enough, get up. I must explain
Enough now! With a soul clear-sighted
Enough! Sing us another song!’
‘Enough, though, for a winter’s spree,
Enough to listen to your greeting
Enraptured, he displayed his mettle
Ensconced before a blazing hearth,
Enshroud a day that’s scarcely born.
Enshrouded in the deepest night.
Ensures our universe goes round.
Enters. The ballroom’s full to brimming;
Enters the silent study to
Entreat, confess, reproach, imploring
Enveloped in despondency,
Envisaged some catastrophe;
E. Onegin leaves Moscow for Nizhny Novgorod:
Epicureans to the soul,
Eschews banality, pretence,
36. E sempre bene: ‘And excellently’.
E sempre bene, gentlemen!
Etcetera – for so much more
Eternal truths, pontification,
Eugene already has her word.
Eugene arrives and makes excuses.
Eugene, detesting litigation,
Eugene had long since lost all patience:
9. Eugene Onegin: A Novel in Verse, trans. Douglas Hofstadter (New York: Basic Books, 1999).
8. Eugene Onegin: A Novel in Verse, translated from the Russian with a Commentary by Vladimir Nabokov (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1964).
Eugene Onegin is certainly about the life of the nobility down to the niceties of Onegin’s toiletry. But the popular element is very strong there and even decisive. Filipevna, based on Pushkin’s nurse, is also storyteller to Tatiana, who is rooted in peasant superstition and the Russian countryside. Of course, she also reads French and English novels and writes Russian with extreme difficulty. Her declaration of love for Onegin has to be translated by Pushkin into Russian. Nevertheless, it is clear where her roots are when, as the Princess whom Onegin is courting in Chapter VIII, she repudiates the aristocratic flummery that surrounds her and expresses her longing for the countryside and her nurse, now dead.
3. Eugene Onegin, trans. Charles Johnston (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977).
EUGENE ONEGIN
Eugene Onegin
EUGENE ONEGIN
EUGENE ONEGIN
Eugene remained there, motionless.
Eugene’s immediate reaction
Eugene stood pensively (the Poet
Eugene! Tatiana, lighter than a
Eugene, the moment that he saw her,
Eugene was always pleased to meet him
Eugene was saved by fate’s decision:
Eugene, who loved him as a brother,
Eugene with ease discovered there
Even by chance, their angry feud.
37. even Didelot’s boring stuff: Pushkin in his note 5 comments: ‘A feature of chilled feeling, worthy of Childe-Harold. Didelot’s ballets are filled with a liveliness of imagination and unusual charm. One of our romantic writers found in them far more poetry than in the whole of French literature.’ This ‘romantic writer’ was Pushkin himself.
Evening arrived. The sky has darkened.
Evening arrived. The sky has darkened.
Evening will pass, the morrow too:
Even in jest the heart won’t quiver.
Even unseen, I treasured you.
4. Evgeny Onegin, trans. Oliver Elton (London: The Pushkin Press, 1943).
Exalted feelings, never fading,
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser
Exchanging it for tallow, wood;
Exchanging them each spring for fresh ones,
‘Excuse me, Prince, but do you know
Exhausted by the ballroom’s din,
Exhausted on the rack of leisure
Exile brought Pushkin into closer contact with his own countrymen, learning of their folklore from his beloved serf nurse, Arina Rodionovna, who appears as Filipevna, Tatiana’s nurse, in Eugene Onegin. Her songs about the seventeenth-century rebel Sten’ka Razin inspired Pushkin’s own songs about him (1826). In a letter to his brother (1824) he called him ‘the only poetic figure in Russian history’. The magnetic Emelyan Pugachov (1740?-75), who led a massive peasant revolt against Catherine the Great, dominates The Captain’s Daughter. These rebellions were popular, not directed by another class. Smaller peasant revolts were innumerable during the entire period of serfdom. Where the Decembrists wished to import Western constitutional models into Russia, Pushkin delved ever more deeply into Russian history to seek political answers for his own time. On the eve of the Decembrist revolt he completed his Shakespearean drama Boris Godunov, set in the so-called Time of Troubles (1604–13), the interregnum between the Riurik and the Romanov dynasties. Here, the people, who take centre stage, appear by turn passive, fickle, savage, murderous and finally mortified by the assassination of the deceased Boris’s family, to which they have been party. Their horrified silence at the end, when asked by the Boyars to applaud yet another Pretender, passes judgement not only on their time, but on ruling-class manipulation in every age. The centrality of the people in Boris Godunov goes beyond any of Pushkin’s Shakespearean models. But the play is Shakespearean in the sense that no one is the victor other than history. With this lesson in mind Pushkin writes to a friend, on hearing of the Decembrist defeat, that they should look upon it through Shakespearean eyes.
Expected some adverse event.
Expecting certain recompense,
Exports across the Baltic flood,
Extolled the gardens of Odessa.
Eyes only for the vessel landing,
Faces one meets with every hour,
Fair ladies who are similar.
Falling asleep with satisfaction,
Falling in stars upon the ground.
Falls to our poet from Tambov,
Falsification, noise and blame!
Familiar hilltops that I call to,
Far bolder than a healthy man,
Fare thee well, and, if for ever.
1. Fare thee well… well: The opening of Byron’s poem Fare Thee Well’ from the cycle Poems of Separation, 1816.
Farewell, familiar woods near by;
Farewell, glad nature that I cherish;
Farewell, my freedom that must perish!
‘Farewell now, peaceful dales, farewell to
Farewell, the beauty of the sky,
Farewell the refuge that I’d hide in!
Farewell to golden games, for ever!
Farewell to you, Petrovsky Palace,
Farewell. Whatever you may chart
Fashion’s most recent specimen.
Faster, Andryushka, hasten, hasten!
Fated to roam without resort,
15. Faublas: A sixteen-year-old seducer of young wives in a picaresque novel by Louvet de Couvrai (1760–97). But none of the husbands in the novel can be described as ‘cunning’.
8. fear assailed Tatiana… Felt fear as well: In her dream Svetlana, heroine of Zhukovsky’s ballad (see above), conjures up her lover only to be carried off by him to his grave. This reference presages Tatiana’s nightmare.
Feelings we find ridiculous.
Feel just the slightest bit rheumatic?
Feinstein, E., Pushkin (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1998)
Fell maddened with remorse before her.
Fell sulking and, with indignation,
Felt fear as well – but that will do…
Fennell, J., Nineteenth-Century Russian Literature: Studies of Ten Russian Writers (London: Faber and Faber, 1973)
Fennell, J., Selected Verse with Introduction and Prose Translations (Bristol: Bristol Classical Press, 1991)
Fickle adorer and spectator
Fidget, while coachmen round a fire,
Fidget, while coachmen round a fire,
Finding himself at this huge banquet,
Finding him wholly dissolute:
4. Finnish Maid: A reference to a fragment of Baratynsky’s poem Eda (1825).
First let us puncture vanity
First (listen, am I right?), I see
First published 1833
First, that he’d not the right to sport
Fit for a fashion illustrator,
Five further paces they traversed.
Five versts away from Krasnogorye
Flares up with jealous indignation
Flash, captivate and fly away.
Flattering to entertain and charm,
fledglings of the Lyovshin school,
Flew headlong through the dusty air.
Flicking his straying hair apart,
Flies off like fluff across the skies,
Flies off to swallow from the shell
Flies tiptoe to a passing man,
Flies to the mill, the horses strain.
46. Flora: Ancient Roman goddess of spring and flowers.
Flow forth aglow with verities.
Fluff up her curls to look more fitting,
Followed by long and narrow glasses,
Fond early on of reading novels,
34. Fontenelle: Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle (1657–1757), French sceptical philosopher, author of Entretiens sur la pluralit&#233; des mondes (Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds, 1686), the Russian translation of which was banned by the Church.
28. Fonvizin: Denis Fonvizin (1745–92), author of The Minor, a satirical play about cruelty, smugness and ignorance.
For all that you have given me;
For all the countryside is freezing,
For all the dazzle she possessed.
For all the tears she has suppressed,
For all those places I recall,
For being by the heavens blest
For being predisposed to trust,
Forbidden fruit provides more spice,
For billets doux and declarations
For country quiet: there I thrive:
For days and nights to wonder when
For day to end he cannot wait.
For dear Tatiana, she is gone…
Foregathering at private meetings,
16. Foregathering… reciprocating greetings: The reference is to the conspiratorial Russian lunches’ held by the Decembrist Ryleyev, who liked to stress his Russianness by serving only Russian food and drink.
Foreseeing always their conclusion;
For Eugene has not changed a bit,
For Eugene in the dark of night,
Forever merry as the day,
Forever modest and submissive,
Forever satisfied with life,
For every pastime thinkable,
FOREWORD
For fear of getting Eugene fraught;
For five, six weeks a year Odessa,
Forget renown and eulogy,
Forgetting both the town and friends,
Forgetting feasts and opulence,
Forgetting her Olympian speech
Forgetting monde and noisy ball,
Forgive: I love Tatiana so,
Forgive the fever of the young,
For God’s sake, that will do, good fellow.
For governing her husband’s life,
For her to meet a monk in black
For him at an exalted site.
For him our life and destiny
For him there are no more enchantments,
For household business claimed the day,
For long a heartsick enervation
For long… for ever… in his track
For long had her imagination,
For loving without double-dealing,
For luxury and modish languor –
For money’ sake (and it was here
For Moscow on her bended knees
For noisy, glittering vanities…
For Olga, young and beautiful,
For one wild garden and a book,
For our encounter – which I crave;
For our poor home, to me the dearest,
Forsake the city gates, make haste!
For several days thereafter she
For sighs and boredom and deception
For sombre Russia, for the portion
For someone feigning oddity,
For some presumptuous glance, opinion
For something new, no matter what.
For so much talk – an interlude
For steppe-land song she found appealing…
For strange, scant tongues the tribesmen teach,
For two long minutes they were quiet,
For two whole days the lonely meadows,
For which all else she would forgo,
(For which we should accord him praise).
For which will my young scamp be leaving?
For whom among these jealous daughters
For whom she seems ideal perfection,
For whom, to expiate your wrongs,
For you how long ago did I
Found uncle on a table laid,
Four fatal steps the two had taken.
Fragments of Nordic balladry,
1. Fragments of Onegin’s Journey: This was originally intended to be chapter VIII (with the preceding chapter in the present volume intended as chapter IX). It was published separately and includes stanzas written at various times. The description of Odessa was composed in 1825 while Pushkin was working on Chapter IV. The beginning of the published text was written in the autumn of 1829 and the final stanzas were completed on 18 December 1830, when Pushkin was staying at his Boldino estate. The Foreword first appeared in a separate 1832 edition of Chapter VIII. In the 1833 edition of the entire novel Pushkin included the Foreword and the Journey after his Notes. It is unclear whether a completed version of the Journey ever existed despite Pushkin’s reference to it in the Foreword.
FRAGMENTS OF ONEGIN’S JOURNEY
FRAGMENTS OF ONEGIN’S JOURNEY
Freeborn, R., The Rise of the Russian Novel: Studies in the Russian Novel from ‘Eugene Onegin’ to ‘War and Peace’ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973)
Free from their stormy depredations,
Free now, I seek again the union
Friends, enemies were in attendance,
Friends, not a single one, believe me!
Friends of Ruslan and of Lyudmila,
Friends of Ruslan and of Lyudmila
Frightening shadows gather thickly,
Frightening to a timid swain,
Frolic, if you’re timorous,
From Albion’s proud poetry.
From box or stall, to judge her class.
From cell to cell…
From dark-eyed, fair-complexioned maid,
From different entrances to guard her,
From dream to dream, she no more grieves
From empty rumour far away,
From every devil’s library,
From fireplace and the double windows,
From her accustomed room and bed.
From here he watched, in thought immersed,
From here I picture the occasion:
From her for ever separate;
From hour to hour with still more rapture
From Kishinev to the Morea.
From late at night to break of day,
From mist-enveloped Germany:
From morn the Larin home’s abounding
From now on the tone of the novel changes. Pushkin completed Chapter VI about four months after the five Decembrist leaders were hanged. Repeatedly, in his manuscripts he draws sketches of his friends on the gallows, in one case adding ‘this might have been me’. In an omitted stanza he suggests that Lensky, too, had he lived, could have swung from the gallows like the Decembrist poet Ryleyev, who was also Pushkin’s acquaintance. Pushkin’s distancing from the Decembrists was part of his ‘descent’ to prose, yet the executions of his friends haunted him for the rest of his life, as they do the pages of Onegin.
From proper gentlemanly distance;
From Romulus until this day.
From the Aeneid a verse or two,
From thirty-odd right down to two;
From this moment Pushkin was trapped by the court until his death in a duel with a French &#233;migr&#233; officer, the Baron D’ Anth&#232;s, who was paying attentions to his wife. Pushkin was thirty-seven. Later, the symbolist poet Alexander Blok remarked that it was not D’ Anth&#232;s’s bullet that killed Pushkin, but ‘lack of air’ in the court environment.
From which I’m disaccustomed now.
From which the world will never profit,
Frost gleams. And we take pleasure in
Full of a holy reverie,
Further Reading
Further Reading
Gallops away, in thought rehearsing:
Games that a grown-up scamp designs,
Games we girls play privately.
16. gates where lions curl: Heraldic animals made of iron or alabaster and painted green with no connection to the sculpted lion, nor any necessary resemblance to a real one.
Gathered supporters to his call,
Gave to her heart much more delight.
Gay magpies gathering beyond,
Girls’ smacking kisses, barking pugs,
Girls whisper in a corner space;
Give him this note for O… for that…
Gives up herself without conditions
Giving her lessons privately!
Glances into the garden bare…
Glances that fly from every angle,
Glitters and whirls. But from his bed
Gloomy and dismal, sad, forsaken;
Glory and good! The tune is piteous,
Glowing on ancient cupolas.
Glued by the ice, two flimsy staves
Goddess of sighs and secret places;
God grant them life for many a day!
God grant you find here just a grain
God, no! Much better to remain
God save his soul, he was so patient,
Gone are the choirs to which we hearkened;
Gone like a shadow of the dawn,
Gone… Wait, his profile’s in between.’
Gone! Where’s the ardent agitation,
Goodbye.’ And she’s alone at last.
Goodbye, my lively, long endeavour,
Goodbye, strange comrade, now for ever,
Goodbye to her, his youthful maid,
‘Good sir, my income’s much too slender.’
28. graces of young Moscow: An ironic reference to three maids of honour, known in Moscow as the three graces’.
Grandiloquent and trenchant pleaders,
9. Grandison: Hero of Richardson’s Sir Charles Grandison (1754).
Greenleaf, M., Pushkin and Romantic Fashion: Fragment, Elegy, Orient, Irony (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994)
Greets with a smile the new year’s morning.
Grew wild and shared their daily rhythm,
Grey-haired Filipyevna treads lightly,
20. grey-haired Kalmyk: The Kalmyks were originally a Mongolian people who moved westwards in the seventeenth century and were absorbed into the province of Astrakhan in south-west Russia in the eighteenth century, later to become a republic under the Soviets. It was an aristocratic fashion in the eighteenth century to keep a Kalmyk boy in the household, a practice that had fallen into disuse when the Larins arrived, so that the original boy is here an old man. Only a few very rich houses employed a special doorman; in most cases one of the household staff would take over this function like the Kalmyk here, who is still engaged in a household task as he does so.
Griboyedov
41. Grimm: Melchior Grimm (1723–1807), French encyclopedist of German extraction.
Gripping the pistol in his hand,
Grown cool to dreams and to the lyre,
Grown fonder of my friends’ regard,
Grow pale and waste away – that’s rapture!
Grows pale, is wasting, does not speak!
Grows up, gets animated, seethes,
Grumble or drink, somehow or other
Guests make their bows and shuffle by,
Guillot brings dressing-gown and slipper,
Guillot was standing, disconcerted.
11. Gulnare: Byron. Gulnare is the heroine of The Corsair.
Gvozdin, a splendid lord who flourished
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov
Habit allayed the grief she suffered,
Habit is heaven’s gift to us:
Had been aware, in some way learning,
Had brought a stanza for Tatiana,
Had brought him bliss and painful lessons,
Had brought to Tanya’s solitude,
Had changed in him a soul whose fire
Had driven down to his estate
Had, heedless, left him in the cold?
Had I been hopeful to expect you
Had, in her humble lot, neglected,
Had in this heart vibrated, churned,
Had long abandoned reading, still
Had long ago arranged the day.
Had made on all the Larin folk
Had once by him been torn apart?
Had opened, roaring, under her.
Had silently, it seemed, laid bare
Had stirred from early days his blood.
Had struck Onegin, what they meant,
Had struck: the poet, with no sound,
Had talked about these gentlemen.
Hailing another, or the entry,
Half-comic and half-melancholic,
Half-comic and half-melancholic,
Half-opened still, condemned to wither.’
Halfway with flattery expressed…
Happier still who knew it not,
Happy is he who can alloy
Happy who tasted their excitement
Has by a friendly hand been killed!
Has crept beyond the gate. ‘Farewell,
Has forced young boughs on sultry days
Has he returned in novel style?
Has it arrived? What joy, what pleasure!
Has met an end untimely. Hard
Has not expressed itself in Russian,
Has painted early snow for us
Has plied his wonder-working brushes
Has run in turbid streams that eddy
Has sped by coach to make his call.
Has stirred his sluggish soul to fever?
Hastened with strength and boldness to
Has withered at the morning’s dawn,
Haunted by days he can’t regain.
Haunted by rhymes and yearning’s ache,
Have entered into quarantine?
Have gained him royal favour, fame?
Have, it is true, become a bore;
Have no idea; and what’s the point?),
Have passed since in a dreamy haze
Have reconciled the friends again!
Have scarce their saucers in their hand,
Have two small feet caused me to suffer…
Have your fling, my darling ones.
Having changed places, are reseated;
Having completed Chapter One.
Having diverted you concerning
Having made taste an industry,
Having no common views to share,
Having retired from noble service,
He adds:
He almost grasped the mechanism
He also put into the scales
Health, bloom of life that sweetly flowers,
He answers: it is Agafon.
Hearing amid the noise and lull
Hearing my strophes’ sweet-toned chants,
Hearing the woods’ new murmuring;
Hearkening not to friendly clapping,
Hears nothing. In the orchard, maids
Heaven no doubt has ruled it so.
He boldly put belle Tatiana.
He brings her solace when she grieves,
He brought with him the fruits of learning
He calls you proudly to a duel,
He cannot bring me happiness.’
He casts a fluffy boa, if he
He chides the uninvited pair;
He could dispute and be amusing,
He could express himself and write,
He could, no matter how we pressed him,
He could not… She then spoke, inquiring
He’d don his glasses and agree
He’d dupe a fool or stupefy
He destined Olga for my bride,
He’d fall himself into a trap.
He’d had enough of them for years.
He did not have the scholar’s temper
He died an hour before his dinner,
He’d killed his friend; bereft of pleasure,
He’d mildly check a boyish lark
He does not hear his neighbour, who
He drinks – they shout and drink a round.
He eased the peasant yoke, replacing
He entered… ah now, what’s he saying?
He enters: cork to ceiling goes
He enters in a nervous manner,
He finds it fun, the pain he scorns,
He fled their noisy conversations:
He flies, ascends the marble stairway,
23. he found a bore: Omitted lines: there are a number of variants behind stanzas 23–6 that either reinforce the civility surrounding Tatiana in stanza 23 or sharpen the satire of stanzas 24–6.
He found his way back after all,
He found no trace in her that loosely
He found the grounds full of attendants;
He gave his arm with some compassion.
He gave three balls a year, impervious
He gazes with sweet feeling, heartened
He gets no answer to this letter,
He gives a sign – they spring to action,
He guides her, nonchalantly gliding,
He had no appetite to hazard
‘He has forgotten us, that’s plain.’
He heeded Lensky with indulgence.
He in his soul began to sketch
He is an honest guy and eager.’
He is forgot, his bride has given
He is insensitive and still?
He isn’t here. They’ve never met her…
He keeps his resolute lorgnette
He kept consulting watch and sun.
He knits his brow – there’s not a sound.
He lacked employment and a wife
He laid his trusting conscience bare.
He laughs – they roar with satisfaction,
He lay inert; uncanny-seeming,
He lays the maiden on the floor.
He leaves a tender verse behind,
He leaves the packed hall hurriedly
He leaves upon one cloudless morning
He left forthwith; Eugene, remaining
He, like Childe Harold, would arrive
He listened with excitement to
He lived with neither work nor goal
He’ll be wherever on the dot.
He’ll hold you fast, there’s no denying,
He’ll wake past noon, and till next morning
He locked himself inside his den,
He looked a poet to the letter:
He looks and calls… but there’s no power
He looks outside – and sees, alack,
He loved, ah, as we cannot know it,
Help in his soul despising men,
He may be right, but I have preferred the more recognizable ‘bird cherries’ and ‘acacias’. Batyushkov (1787–1855) was one of Pushkin’s predecessors from whom he learned standards of harmony and precision.
He might have learned life’s true dimension,
He might have manifested feeling
He must depart, yet as he bade
He neither dreamed of nor foresaw.
He noticed nothing any more.
He only dares from time to time,
He opened up the cupboards there:
He pours out tunes that effervesce,
‘He promised that today he’d come.’
Her ancient hand raised in the air,
Her ancient mobcap made of tulle;
Her bosom lifts, her features redden,
Her bow is equally serene.
Her by the neck, then forcefully
Her childish merriments and sport.
Her chosen dream so fervently?
Her countenance is round and fair
17. her crimson hands extending: Pushkin comments in his note 34: ‘A parody of well-known lines by Lomonosov: Dawn with crimson hand/From morning’s tranquil waters’. These are the opening lines of a Lomonosov ode celebrating Empress Elizabeth’s ascent to the throne. Pushkin’s parody recalls the discussion of the ode in Chapter IV, stanza 33 . Lomonosov’s ‘crimson hand’ derives from Homer’s ‘rosy-fingered dawn’.M. V. Lomonosov (1711–65) was a scientist, poet, creator of the modern literary language and founder of Moscow University.
Her discomposure, tired expression
Herds low, the hush of darkness brings
Herds wandered through the meadow ground,
He reached the river by the hill;
He read again, but all at random:
He read the sceptic Bayle,who led him
Here an ambassador was speaking
Here are hussars on leave, invading,
Here are inveterate fops, parading
Her ears with sound, her eyes with light
Here Bonaparte chose to reside
Here in our home, where we could speak,
Here is his letter, word for word.
Here is the fireplace,’ said the crone:
Here is the North now, storm clouds driving,
Her elder sister was Tatiana…
Here Lunin with audacity
‘Here master used to sit alone.
Here next, by leafy grove surrounded,
‘Here’s Eugene! God, how will I cope?
Here, there was dullness, there pretence;
Here there were several spinsters, who
Here was a crank most dangerous.
Here was a youth with charm and mind.
Here was Prolasov whose distinction
Here was, to epigrams addicted,
Here was, with scented, greying hair,
Here were, in mobcaps and in roses,
Her eyes as azure as the heaven,
Her eyes in search of Lensky turning,
Her father was a decent fellow,
Her flaxen curls, her smile so even,
Her hand is trembling, yet she’s shy
Her handkerchief picks from the floor.
Her head sinks downward to her shoulder,
Her heart retains a dream of hope.
Her heart’s abounding plenitude;
Her heart’s fond treasure, blissful, aching,
Her heart with greater perturbation
Her husband dozes, shouts ‘encore’,
Her husband enters, interrupting
Her husband was her fiance then,
Her husband wisely left, the morrow,
He rings: his valet, French and chipper,
Her journey home is long deferred.
Her light chemise that won’t enfold her
Her liking more than her intended:
Her little voice more tender than
Her loosened and unruly hair,
Her loud, protracted wails, laments
Her love for him was not connected
Her monogram and graven seal.
Her Moscow cousin, when she’d seen her,
Her native gifts, began to sport
Her novels and the country flowers,
Her rosy freshness, in no manner
Her rural life: the tranquil bowers,
Her secret glow, her dreamy mood,
Herself already to be wed,
10. Her silken girdle she unknotted: Unknotting her girdle is a magical act like taking off a crucifix. It is an invitation to the secret world of superstition. Russians would often wear a belt in the bathhouse to ward off evil spirits.
Her silken girdle she unknotted,
Her slender fingers knew not needles;
Her soul pervaded by the shadows
Her soul, whatever her impression
Her stubborn lips remain in place!
Her summer in the country, wending
Her tears and, there before her sitting,
Her tone remains as it had been,
Her transport all her own for fear
Her trustfulness, her pure devotion.
Her voice, her slender waist and stance
Her waist she twists, untwists; her feet
Her walks continue, lasting longer.
Her youthful little dove now hastens
He said he’d ‘always be prepared’.
He sang of distant lands, those spheres
He sang of life’s decaying scene,
He sang of love, to love obedient,
He sang of parting and despond,
He sang, too, of romantic roses;
He sat alone as flames would dart,
He saw in letters little use;
He scarcely can reply to her.
He’s constantly beside her, whether
He scrawls a courteous ‘Yes, I’ll be there.’
He’s dreadfully dissatisfied;
He sees before him Olga full
He sees on melted snow, recumbent,
He sees past enemies forgotten,
He sees the wayward Terek, scoring
He separates before her or
He sets off on the journey home,
He settled down – to the distraction
He’s Eugene. Really? Yes, it’s clear.
4. He’s even honest… every stage: Quotations from Voltaire (1694–1778): ‘et m&#234;me devint honn&#234;te homme’ (Candide, 1759); ‘… combien le si&#232;cle se perfectionne’ (opening of Canto 4 of Civil War in Geneva, 1768).
He’s even honest – thus our age
He shadows her in every place;
He’s happy, almost well today…
He’s happy if upon her shoulders
He’s hardly entered than towards him
He shared the games that she selected;
He’s here: Monsieur Guillot, my friend,
He should have set about the healing
He should have started some time back.
He simply bows, yet in his eyes
He sketches pictures for his bride –
He sleeps with her and never leaves.
He’s left behind a dismal trace.
He slowly stiffens, ossifying,
He sometimes takes and reads out for her
He sought a duel with his friend.
He sought still in the desert world;
He sought them with no great affection
He’s someone I can recommend.
He stays: beforehand he’d been ready
He’s vicious and a gossip, too.
He’s with his Olga occupied,
He tells his valet to retain
He thought that friends would, in like manner,
He thought that he should be united
3. Hetman: Headman or captain, from the Polish hetman.
He took instead to groveland cover,
He trembles, can’t think what to say,
He tried some authors of our own
He tried to stop his lips from making
He twirls her near the company,
‘He used to dine here in the winter
‘He used to hold me in his arms.
He waited – but in vain he waited –
He wakes; an invitation’s brought;
He walks in like a corpse, nobody
He wanders, and his soul hears not
He wanted to address her… yet
He was a maestro with a pistol
He was a simple, kindly barin,
He was by fortune talented
He was not stupid; and, despising
He who has felt will be forever
He who has lived and thought can never
He wished to write – but could not manage
He with his lyre roamed ever further;
He witnessed, tenderly elated,
He won respect by his demeanour
He wooed them with insouciance;
He wore your pencils down, Saint-Priest;
He wrote and burned Chapter X in Boldino shortly after finishing the present Chapter VIII and Onegin’s Journey, but left a coded copy of the stanzas published in this volume, which have been the subject of different readings and orderings. Only two of the stanzas are almost complete. I have followed the presentation by Boris Tomashevsky, the leading Pushkin textologist of the Soviet era. While using the same stanzaic form, the chapter is entirely different from the rest of the novel, reading more like a chronicle. The content of the chapter is politically explosive, starting with a scathing satire on Alexander I and ending with an ironic history of the Decembrist movement. It also includes a sceptical hope in stanza 7, where every other line begins with ‘maybe’, that Nicholas I will reunite the Siberian exiles with their families. None of the characters in the previous chapters makes an appearance here. However, a Captain Yuzefovich reported Pushkin saying to him: ‘Onegin will either perish in the Caucasus or join the Decembrist movement.’
he young spectator now is drawn
Him does repentance always gnaw.
Him does the serpent of remembrance,
Himself appears in such a pose).
Himself at billiards, starts to play
Himself by passion invalided,
Himself that evening where he’ll go.
His aching inactivity –
His ageing uncle’s death as well?
His card decks and obliging dice,
His carriage, soon he’s at the gate.
His cotton cap, already has
His cows abroad while night is clinging,
His daily life and occupations.
His daughters come with last year’s fashion,
His dinner and adoring wife.
His doubting heart’s uncertainty;
His enemies, and friends to boot,
His eyes roam wildly seeing him here,
His father could not understand,
His father died upon the instant.
His father lived on borrowed cash,
His fortune to a crafty deuce.
His friends and kept him entertained:
His friends towards the farthest pace,
His gaze not pain, but death expresses.
His glass, a toast to his fair neighbour,
His hand upon his breast he presses
His head towards his shoulder bending,
His heart forgetting praise, alone,
His heart’s ungovernably caught!
His heart was on the point of breaking.
His horn to gather them around;
His humour halfway mixed with bile
His inward eye saw others hinted.
His life rolled on without a hazard;
His lines aloud, by fervour seized,
His look of inspiration blind –
His manner gravely elevated,
His many eccentricities.
His melancholy does not slacken:
His moment’s bliss with my rejection;
His mother from her window warns…
His mottled sandals made of bast.
His nag then somehow starts to trot;
His neighbour in the finest phrasing
His neighbours’ hospitality;
His neighbour’s humble gravestone, mourning,
His neighbour standing at the door.
His observations at the time.
His pen breathes love, his tender entry
His pencil marks by certain lines.
His pipe’s first moan of melody.
His pistols, ready for the fight,
His presence by Prince N is sought
His prime thus passing, unfulfilled.
His relative and friend, Onegin,
His selfsame life will go on turning
His senses clouded, and he merely,
His silenced lyre might have extended
His song possessed the clarity
His soul full of regrets and woes,
His soul showed here in noble light
His strange approach to Olga – all
His tardy sleep is worried by
His tea-and-rum cup relegated,
His thoughts were far away, as old
His time, without me, will arrive;
1833 Historical research. Travelled to Urals. Second Boldino autumn (The Bronze Horseman; work on The Queen of Spades).
15. his verse… ready for your gaze: Every phrase of Lensky’s poem is a stereotype of contemporary elegiac poetry, including Pushkin’s own early verse, and translations from French and German poetry. Nevertheless, as elsewhere in the novel, parody blends with genuine feeling. The arrow’ in line 9 is not a poetic synonym for ‘bullet’, but a conventional literary euphemism for death.
His youthful dream of ecstasy,
Hm! Hm! I ask you, noble reader,
Hoisington, S. S. (ed.), A Plot of Her Own: The Female Protagonist in Russian Literature (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1995). Includes chapter by Hoisington on ‘Tatiana’
Hoisington, S. S. (ed.), Russian Views of Pushkin’s ‘Eugene Onegin’, trans. S. S. Hoisington and W. Arndt (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988)
Holding a happy stirrup… feeling
Holding a paper, turns her way
Homage, congratulations greet her;
9. Homer: Ancient Greek poet, somewhere between the twelfth and seventh centuries BC, supposed author of the Iliad and the Odyssey.
Homer, Theocritus he rubbished,
Hope nursed his feelings, gave him courage,
Horace
Hostility with calumny,
Hours passed – time that the tea was set,
‘How are the Larin girls, I wonder,
How beautiful, when day is dawning,
How bitingly he would beget
How changed Tatiana is, adapting
‘How did you marry, then?’ ‘Oh, Tanya,
However, in this moist Odessa
However turbulent its duties,
How fiery, when he spoke, instead,
How, holding back her indignation,
How, in my childhood, oftentimes,
How languid, when no word he said,
How life had revelled, blood had burned;
‘How long?’ ‘About two years.’ ‘To whom?’
How long had he been here, and whence,
How long since, each to each a brother,
How long since they from one another
57. How often… bright: Pushkin’s note 8 refers the reader to Nikolai Gnedich’s (1784–1833) idyllic poem ‘The Fishermen’ (1822) for its ‘charming description’ of the Petersburg night, from which he quotes at length.
How often did the summer court us,
How often I got drunk on you!
How often, moonlit, like Leonora,
How often on the shores of Tauris
How often, sadly separated,
How often would she, fond companion,
How rapid was his look and bashful,
How sad, however, if we’re given
How sad to me is spring’s arrival,
How self-forgetting he could be!
How soon he knew how to bedevil
How soon he learned the skill of feigning,
‘How Tanya’s grown! How long, my dear,
How whispers speed around the hall…
How with the heart and mind you have
How wondrous-languidly she gazes!…
Âñå êíèãè àâòîðà: http://royallib.com/author/Pushkin_Alexander.html
Âñå êíèãè àâòîðà: http://royallib.com/author/Pushkin_Alexander.html
Ýòà æå êíèãà â äðóãèõ ôîðìàòàõ: http://royallib.com/book/Pushkin_Alexander/eugene_onegin.html
Îñòàâèòü îòçûâ î êíèãå: http://royallib.com/comment/Pushkin_Alexander/eugene_onegin.html
Hummed Idol Mio, Benedetta,
Hymen’s concerns and tribulations,
I always note with satisfaction
I am confused’… ‘Nurse, tell me truly
I am exchanging my dear peace
I am indebted to the commentaries on Onegin by Vladimir Nabokov, Yuri Lotman and N. L. Brodsky.
‘I am in love,’ again she whispered
‘I am in love, go, let me be.’
I am… in love, nurse… can’t you tell?’
2. I am writing now… into my head: A. S. Pushkin, Sobranie Sochinenii, vol. 9, Letters 1815–1830 (Moscow: GIKhL (Gosudarstvenoye Izdatel’stvo Khudozhestvennoi Literatury), 1963), p. 77.
I beckon every sail and clime.
I beg of you, become my shield,
I beg you, note my every word,
I boldly put my trust in you,
I call to it: it’s time, it’s time!
I can foresee another matter:
I cannot help, though, my compassion;
I cannot tell. But now you’ll meet
I cannot think of where to start.’
I can predict: I shall offend
I can’t recall a thing. Alas,
‘I can’t sleep here, nurse, it’s so airless!
I close! I dread to read this through…
I could enjoy another meeting.
I could not yet distinguish clearly
I could regale the world of learning
I’d choose the other for my wife.
I’d curbed myself of that sweet habit,
I’d doubtless choose no other bride
Ideal and down-to-earth bucolic…
Ideal and down-to-earth bucolic,
I’d find it sad now to depart
I’d go insane about a ball:
I’d have preferred, had I the power,
I’d leave the steep shore for the sea.
38. Idol Mio, Benedetta: The barcarolle was popular in Russia at the time. Pushkin’s neighbours at Trigorskoye enjoyed singing Kozlov’s poem ‘Venetian Night’ to the tune of a gondolier’s recitative (‘Benedetta sia la madre’ (‘Blest be the mother’)). ‘Idol mio’ is probably a duet by the Italian composer Vicenzo Gabusi: ‘Se, o cara, sorridi’ (‘If you were to smile, my dear’), the refrain of which is: ‘Idol mio, pi&#250; pace non ho’ (‘My idol, I have no peace any more’).
I do not merit them at all.
I do not see what should prevent him,
‘I do not see why that’s so shocking.’
I drag myself at random, wander,
I’d really be a fool to thwart
I dropped into the cattle yard…
I’d say, without poetic glitter,
If destiny preserves my verse.
I fear that my meek supplication
I fear the lingonberry juice
I fear those friends who seek to please.
If he had known what wound was burning
If I, by kindly fate conscripted,
If I could ever without stricture
‘If I had wanted life restricted
I first saw young Tatiana near me,
If it should anywhere transpire
If not, then borrow – say, from me.’
If now Bordeaux is my addiction,
If Onegin did join the Decembrists in the fragmentary Chapter X, as some scholars suppose, then this passage anticipates how he might have felt on the rebound of his disappointed love for Tatiana.
If only seldom, once a week,
If our most precious aspirations,
If people of good sense should take you
If she’d been able to foresee
If we’re to wake or sleep tomorrow
If we’re to wake or sleep tomorrow:
If you but knew some, hollow monde!
If you but knew the frightful torment
If you had still remained with me,
If you were here, you’d see me weeping…
I gave my word, and what? I fear
I got engrossed in recollection
‘I hate your fashionable mocking;
I have a plan already for it,
I have attempted in my translation to write in a contemporary idiom that avoids the antiquarian or the modern/postmodern. As far as the period translation is concerned, I am at one here with the American James Falen, who remarked of his admirable 1995 version of Onegin that he aimed ‘to adapt the rhythms of the poem to the rhythms of English speech’ today and to avoid ‘the sorts of inversions and verbal contortions’ that in his view marred the earlier translations. Only in a few cases have I introduced dated words like ‘ere’, ‘o’er’, ‘midst’, and then for metrical reasons. The rhyming and metrical format of Onegin declares that it is a historical work. It is not a form that is common today. We rhyme much less today. There is no need to imitate poets of the past in order to give a historical sense to Onegin. I was once counselled in Russia to render Pushkin’s various styles into equivalents from English poetry, but that would have turned the translation into a Nabokovian artefact. It is very tempting to adopt the manner of Byron’s Don Juan, especially since it was Byron’s poem that set Pushkin going. But it would miss the lyrical depth and what an acquaintance once described to me as the ‘homeliness’ of Pushkin, who in any case, soon turned against the English poet. It would also miss Pushkin’s classical compactness. On the other hand, it is extremely difficult to render the multiplicity of styles in Onegin, which are embedded in history, and which require a commentary. Pushkin helps by parodying these styles and so bringing them into relief. The same is true of the constant epithets accompanying his characters. These are convenient stepping-stones for a translator. In present-day syntax they will stand out and evoke the flavour of the original without lapsing into the archaic. Best of all is to be able to reproduce Pushkin’s simplicity, tangibility and precision, then the problem falls away and he appears as our contemporary.
I have it, ready for your gaze:
I have no leisure to impart,
I hear your furious dispraise.
‘I,’ he reflects, ‘will be her saviour.
I knew you on your first appearing;
I know it well, to me it’s kindred
I know: my end may well be dawning,
I know, of course, that it is redolent
I know that tender Parny’s ways
I know you’re sent by God’s provision,
I led my frisky Muse to prize
I like a friendly chat in quiet
I liked his personality,
I liked to stroll there formerly,
I like to time repasts at leisure
I lived in dust-submerged Odessa…
I’ll be forgot, but you’ll return
I’ll be your husband to the end.’
I’ll curb all comers with my people. –
I’ll dedicate an ode to you,
‘I’ll die,’ she says, but does not stir,
I’ll give, perhaps, occasion to!
‘I’ll gladly.’ ‘When?’ ‘Why, now’s all right.
28. ‘I’ll go no more a-roving: I have allowed myself a quote from Lord Byron (1788–1824), since he is omnipresent in the text, from his poem So, we’ll go no more a-roving’.
I’ll have them quarrel once again
I’ll pay the censorship my debt;
I’ll peep at them,’ she says, advancing
I’ll settle to prosaic labours;
I’ll spend with a Venetian daughter,
Illuminated by Diana;
Illumination row on row,
I loved you then, was that upsetting?
I love their little feet, yet guess
I love them, dear Elvina, under
I love the youthfulness and madness,
I love you like an elder brother
I love you (why should I disguise it?),
Imagination seethes, excited,
Imagine females in discussion
Imagine what it’s like for me,
I make two ages go to war.’
I married. Pray you, leave me now.
I may have been, but it is so.
Imbibe the magic bane of yearning,
I’m faint with shame and fear… However,
I’ m fond now of the balalaika
I’m frightened that my reason’s failing,
I’m getting quite deranged, I fear…
I’m good for nothing now, it’s clear.
‘I’m happy, am I not, my dear?’
I’m happy with a homely clan,
Immersed in bitter meditation,
Immersed in blissful divination,
Immersed in what looks like a letter,
Immodest sighs or glances candid,
Immune to jealousy’s invasion,
Immune to wanton fashion’s sway,
‘I’m old, I’m very old, my heart,
I’m only writing this to show
I’m on the verge of crying, sobbing!’
Imparts mamma’s morality.
Impassioned speeches made when young
Impatiently until the tension
Impatient nature waited, waited,
Impetuous and trivial…
Implacable and irreproachable,
Imploring aspect, mute rebuke
Improves itself at every stage.
I’m running after her much less.
I’m running after her much less.
I’ m sad and sick at heart, my dear.
I’m sad still, but the tears are gone,
‘I’m sure nobody will be there,
I much prefer Bordeaux’s quiescence
I must be certain every morning
I must translate Tatiana’s letter,
I’ m very fond of this expression,
I’m young, o Lord, there’s life in me:
In a chilled bottle, as they dine.
In a decrepit almanac;
In all, he cheerfully believed her,
In all of Russia. Long indeed
In all solemnity maintaining
In a mysterious gondola
(Inanities or pure confections
In banishment and deportation
In blissful shade sleeps quietly in.
In bridal brilliance apparent,
In cantos, twenty-five or so.
In case its blunted shoe should catch
In Chapter VIII Pushkin’s Muse embodies each of Pushkin’s feminine ideals in turn until she becomes Tatiana. (In Onegin’s Journey (stanza 9) he embraces the ideal of the housewife!) Pushkin’s friend the poet Wilhelm K&#252;chelbecker remarked that he saw Pushkin himself in the new Tatiana. It has also been suggested that Pushkin intended his heroine as a model for his future wife to follow. There has been an industry of attempts in Russia to identify Pushkin’s characters with real people. But the direct source of his characters is his poetry. They are poetic creations. They proceed from his lyrical self. Pushkin constantly refers to them as ‘my Eugene’, ‘my Tatiana’, ‘my Lensky’. Each is endowed with a specific vocabulary that accompanies him or her through the story. Onegin is ‘strange’, ‘odd’, ‘eccentric’, ‘addicted to dreams’, ‘abrasive’, his mind is ‘sharp’ and ‘chilled’, his humour ‘bilious’, his epigrams ‘dark’. Nor is he just a Russian type. Pushkin noted in a draft that Onegin always took three novels with him: Charles Mathurin’s Melmoth the Wanderer, Fran&#231;ois-Ren&#233; de Chateaubriand’s Ren&#233; and Benjamin Constant’s Adolphe:
Inclining gently at my bedhead,
Includes me in the social round,
In darkness in their room together
In days of revelries and passions
Indeed, a strict examination
Indeed, I offer my excuses,
Indeed, quite suddenly the steward
In densest grass, unnoticed by
Indifferent to its latest rages,
In drawing rooms, dejected, languid;
In duels he took a pedant’s pride,
In dusty chronicles to trace
In each the heart had lost its zest;
In early morning now – she started
In eavesdropping on the confessions
I need another kind of image:
I never would have known this anguish;
I never would have known you, thus
In every album you can mention
In every nuance sumptuous;
In every Russian heart! I heard
In fact, as she had always been.
In fantasy she visualizes
In fashionable London city,
In fast succession have decayed,
In flames of love, in luxury,
Informally, arrived to rue
Informs his man that time is pressing,
In French, which he’d by now perfected,
In friendly greetings he delighted
In front of her, the girls stopped chasing
In front of him an eagle soaring,
… In front of him,
In front of mirrors in his lair,
In front of you and everywhere
In front of you upon the earth,
In frosty darkness Tanya dimly
In frowning beauty, boughs hang low,
Infusing her complacent face.
In girlish innocence and grace,
In glorifying my sad mission,
In guessing cards and the predictions
In having just a single sound
In her excursions from the manor
In 1825, he was removed from Odessa, at the request of Vorontsov, to Mikhailovskoye, the Pushkin family estate in north-west Russia, which was to be his third and final place of exile, From there, in a letter to another friend, Alexander Bestuzhev, Pushkin wrote, in a different vein, about Onegin and Don Juan:
In his damp grave in mother-earth.’
In his first youth he’d fallen prey
In hope the creature will not find her,
In idleness and shaded ways?
In innocent pursuits I wander,
Iniquitously, he committed
Initially, I was confused
In its unchanging, motley way,
In just a fortnight he’d be wed.
In keeping with good taste, well bred;
In leafy shade, by oaks protected,
In letters of the heart how casual!
In love with Tanya like a child,
In low-cut frock Tatiana goes
In moonlight overcome by mist,
In my capacity as rhymer,
In Olga’s album writes to please,
In Olga’s looks there’s no more life
In one another’s company.
In our forefathers’ vaunted day,
In Paris we had congregated
In Petrarch’s footsteps, and besides
In Petrarch’s tongue, the tongue of love.
In philosophical seclusion
In planting cabbages, like Horace,
In pointed cap and cloaked with fluff
In powdery snow; a long branch catches
In public gaze or on the sly,
Inquiry from the ch&#226;telaine.
In recent glory here resounded.
In reddish wig, bespectacled.
In 1812, Russia’s armies defeated Napoleon. Yet on reaching Paris their younger officers were drawn to the ideals of the Enlightenment and the Revolution. Back in Russia, they were keen to introduce reforms – abolition of serfdom, a constitutional monarchy, even a republic. Having no influence on the increasingly reactionary Tsar Alexander I (1777–1825), who headed the Holy Alliance, they began forming secret societies on the model of the Western Carbonari movements, aimed at overturning the government. Pushkin, then aged thirteen, befriended some of these officers when they were quartered in the grounds of his lyc&#233;e. Several of his close schoolfriends would later join the secret societies. For the liberal nobility 1812 was a wake-up call. Officers were impressed by the courage of their serf soldiers. Soon, on leaving the lyc&#233;e, Pushkin was writing poems deploring serfdom. Circulating all over Russia, they earned him the honour of becoming the Tsar’s first political victim, exiled in 1820. The years of hope came to an end when the young revolutionaries attempted an ill-organized coup d’&#233;tat on the death of Alexander, which was mercilessly crushed by the new Tsar, Nicholas I (1825–55). The date of the revolt, 14 December 1825, gave the participants the name ‘Decembrists’.
In sensible and ancient taste,
In servant girls’ prognostications,
In sheepskin coat and crimson sash.
In shortened or in lengthened line
In short, is what we call khandra –
Inside a quilted housecoat wrapped.
Inside her old environment,
Inside Odessa’s dust bowl, I
Inside their heads and will not leave,
In some few spots a recent measure
In some five hundred years) our highways
In some secluded, rural place!
In so serene and quiet a current…
Inspiring faith and undermining,
In spring, when swans call out, imperious,
Instead of acting or because
Instead of bristling like a beast,
In stillness or in social noise,
Instructed by her nurse, Tatiana
In such a curt and point-blank manner
In such an album, I confess,
In sudden flame his soul burst forth,
Insulting you while you were drinking,
In summer he was up by seven
In Tanya’s close proximity,
Intelligence, a lively will,
Intelligence, nor with the art
Interrogations, gossip, news,
In that benumbing world he goes in,
In that benumbing world he goes in,
‘In that case, come,’the Prince says, taking
In that high autocratic court,
In that intoxicating slough
In that intoxicating slough
In that intoxicating slough,
25. In that intoxicating… together now: Pushkin points out in his note 40 that in the first edition of the novel the last two lines of stanza 46 were different and linked with another stanza, 47, all of which he quotes. This version reinforces the anger and satire of the previous stanza:
In that remote and distant corner
In the affair, what’s left to do?
In their decipherment engrossed.
12. in the land… The simple product: A principal tenet of physiocrat economic theory, originating in eighteenth-century France, according to which national wealth was based on the ‘produit net’ of agriculture.
In the reception room there’s not
In the salon, from her divan,
In the salon new faces, hugs,
In the shade of milky racemosas
In this case judged wrong-headedly.
In this exhausting marathon,
In this majestic legislator
In this new period Russian writers leaned heavily on Western models, and the nobility, to which Pushkin belonged, spoke French before it did Russian. French phraseology, often in its more flowery form, left its stamp on dramatists, novelists and poets during the reign of the German Empress Catherine the Great (1762–96), who loved all things French, corresponded with Voltaire and invited Diderot to St Petersburg. She freed the nobility from the service imposed on them by Peter the Great (1672–1725) and encouraged them to use their leisure in the pursuit of literature and the arts, as long as they didn’t question the fundamentals of the Russian state, in particular serfdom. Enlightenment figures at home were imprisoned or sent to Siberia.
In this perceiving no privation,
In this quick moment of distress!
In this unhappy circumstance,
In those far days, in dales mysterious,
In those far days, serene and careless,
In throes of love, some fancy wild,
In time (we’re told, from the predictions
Into a bodywarmer fitting;
Into a greenwood, so were we
Into a modish tyrant’s keep.
‘Into an unknown family taken…
Into enchanting melodies.
Into her entrance hall of glass;
Into that very room he settled,
Into the avenue, there straight
Into the cups ran, in a stream;
Into the garden, mortified;
Into the mud at daring speed;
Into the mystery of the tomb,
Into the pan, and the indented,
Into the spacious courtyard, training
Into the thickest mud immersed,
Into the wood, up to her knee
Into the yard – quick, start the meal!
In toto to despise mankind,
In tow a weighty general.
Into your foreign carriage climb,
Introduction
Introduction
In turn Tatiana thanks each guest.
Invents for our frivolity,
In very terror; surely we
In vest and ancient nightcap lay.
Inviting him to a soir&#233;e:
In which her heart spoke, unreserved,
In which she seeks and finds some marvel:
In which the epoch was displayed
In which the epoch was displayed
In which Tolstoy with nimble touches
In windowpane calligraphy,
In winter on a cast-iron fender,
In winter when the shade of night
In woebegone romanticism.
In your day and in mine the same),
In you when times were turbulent,
I offer you, then, my oblations,
I place it now in your safekeeping,
I played with his Ochakov medal!
I promise in due time I’ll bring
I read a trusting soul’s confession,
I read it with a secret shudder
I read with pleasure Apuleius
I really cannot fathom why;
I recollect my envy of
I revel in the season, breathing
I roam beside my country lake
Irony bridges the several, often contradictory planes of the novel – linguistic, stylistic, cultural, social. There is scarcely anything in Onegin, from characters to environment, from convictions to sentiment, that is not touched by it. The one exception is Pushkin’s description of nature. Onegin reflects a world in flux. Some commentators have compared his irony with that of the German Romantics. This is wrong. The latter conceived the world as an illusion to be ironically punctured, not in favour of the real world, but a primordial chaos. Postmodernists have interpreted Pushkin in a similar way. Like the Romantics, Pushkin uses irony to remove illusion, but this makes his fictional world more rather than less real, which is how it was taken to be by his contemporaries and the generations that followed them.
Is always silent, angry, grim
Is always thus: with knitted brow,
I say you should not try to follow.
Is brought to table for the poet,
I scarce can drag my feet, the devils,
Is dressed, undressed and dressed again?
I see the L&#225;irins.’ ‘That’s amazing.
I set out on another quest
Is first to drink her health, and she
Is flooded, blocked, its conduits burst,
Is free from and has always been!
I shake with animosity,
I shall describe without delay
I shall encounter, that’s the trouble…’
I shall in grim relief narrate,
I shall no longer be a poet,
I shall not renovate my soul…
I shall not suffer that depraver
29. I shall offend you: An echo of St Preux’s letter to Julie (part 1, letter 2) in Rousseau’s La Nouvelle H&#233;loise: ‘Je sens d’avance le poids de votre indignation…’
I shall recall the tender feeling,
I shall record the plain orations
I shall respect antiquity.
I shan’t complain, for I confess
Is hard for me to bear, my dear.
Is hearing them without partaking,
Is he now? What, deep down in him,
Is he proceeding? Oh, already
Is he, the fugitive, the hermit,
Is he the same or more pacific?
I should like to thank the following for their help: Peter Carson, my editor for his constant scrutiny; Nina Zhutovsky (St. Petersburg) who cleared up every mistake; Robert Chandler for his devotion and counsel; Angela Livingstone for her careful reading and improvements; Ruth Pavey for her pertinent comments; Carla and Dan Mitchell for their common sense; the late Hannah Mitchell for her enthusiasm and encouragement; Leonid Arinshtein (Moscow) for his suggestions; Yu D. Levin (Moscow) for his criticism; Sergei Bocharov (Moscow) for his advice about the map; Martin Thom for his clarification of the role of the Carbonari in my Introduction; PKS Architects and the Art History Department of University College, London for the use of their photocopy facilities; Tom Dale Keever for sending me an audiotape of Innokentii Smoktunovsky reading Eugene Onegin. In retrospect, I am grateful to the late Isaiah Berlin and John Bayley for having blessed my very first stanza.
‘I sing a youthful friend, relating
Is it not true: those charming creatures
Is it the truth, all plain, unvarnished,
I sleep a great deal, little read,
Is lit by stars and lantern light.
Is master (former enemy
Is noble and…’ ‘Here’s cause to quarrel,
Is not sufficiently collected
Is one for ancient apes to play:
Is outlined through the mist of dawn,
Is overdue, and similar
Is richly dressed for sacrifice.
Is simple, but a dear old person;
Is slaughtered by your pistol shot
Is still condemned to loving thus:
Is still the meek and deaf man who
Is surer than from kin or friend:
Is that not so, friend?’ ‘Not a bit!
Is there to greet him in the lobby.
Is this the lot that you deserve,
35. Istomina: Avdotya Istomina (1799–1848), prima ballerina of Petersburg ballet with whom Pushkin was smitten, pupil of Didelot.
Is wakened by the drummer’ beats.
I swear I’ll go no more a-roving!
Is wrested from the family store.
It blows, it howls – and winter then,
It darkened: on the table, gleaming,
It fed a loveless appetite.
I thank the following for their warm support throughout my work on Onegin: Antony Wood, Natalia Mikhailova (Deputy Director of the Pushkin Museum, Moscow), Nicholas Jacobs, Dmitry Gutov (Moscow) and Gina Barker. Above all, I am indebted more than I can say to Barbara Rosenbaum for her love of the poem and her unstinting efforts to ensure that my translation was poetic. Whether it is or not is my responsibility not hers.
I thank you for your honesty…
It has been foreordained in heaven…
I thought perhaps she’ll take this one,
It is a stranger to my soul;
It is my nurse that I pay heed to,
It is not brooked in her milieu.
It is not madrigals that Lensky
It isn’t possible, she tells him,
It is too much to see before one
It once enraptured me: I spent
I, too, am glad to pen a verse,
I tore my own; an alien soul,
I to this day would love a ball.
It puts Tatiana’s heart at ease.
It roused into activity
It’s all come to a sorry pass!
It’s as a friend who’s always there
Its banks in their abrupt descent,
‘It’s boring, that is why, dear man.’
It’s dark: into a sleigh he settles.
Its dated finery and dresses
It seemed it was the wild I needed,
It seemed to be God’s will. My Vanya
It seemed…
It seems, though, in anticipation
It’s for Onegin.’ ‘Oh the letter.
It’s glimpsed and gone: we know this, clearly,
It’s hard for me to let her go.
It’s hardly pleasant, though, you’ll find
‘It’s high time that we married her!’
It’s high time (you’ll agree), by far.
Its impulses are more propitious
It sings and flows. And he rehearses
It’s in your power, I concede it,
It’s just a family affair.
Its light. Upon her elbow leaning,
Its magical cascades begat
It’s morn, all bustle here and there,
Its motley faro cards to him.
‘It’s nothing, nurse, but don’t delay,
It’s nothing, Olga, I must go.’
Its nullity I’ve comprehended
It’s obvious that he’s the master:
It’s only by the by I’m saying
It’s peace alone that I desire,
It’s pleasant with a verse to chasten
Its pristine charms: the leap and dash,
Its sound through centuries to come
It’s still not used to postal prose.
It still feels like an innovation
It’s time: for peace the pen is asking;
It’s time: good idlers, I beseech you,
‘It’s time, my child, to greet the day.
‘It’s time that she was settled, yes,
It’s time to leave you for the ocean,
It’s warm inside his habitation.’
It’s “yes” and “no”, not “yes, sir”, “no,
I turn to you, my poets, teach us;
It used to be my predilection
It was a gentlemanly letter,
It was as if in those generations where Byron, Shelley, Keats, Leopardi, and Poe were dead in their twenties or thirties or barely reached forty, where Coleridge and Wordsworth and Beddoes and Musset burned out while still alive, where Lermontov, like Pushkin, was killed in a duel, before he was twenty seven – it was as if in that great age of the bourgeois ascendancy – and even in still feudal Russia – it were impossible for a poet to survive.
6. It was as if in those generations… write in prose: Edmund Wilson, The Triple Thinkers (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1962), p. 57.
It will be seen from this trajectory that the romantic involvements of the four characters largely coincide with Pushkin’s stay in Mikhailovskoye. The countryside described in these chapters – the cornfields stretching out from Onegin’s manor house, the fields, valleys and woods where Tatiana wanders – reproduce the surroundings of Pushkin’s family estate. Exile was lonely here, forbidding the dissipations enjoyed in Kishinev and Odessa, but it allowed him to write the central chapters of Onegin and the magnificent historical drama Boris Godunov. And, as happened when the Rayevskys passed through Kishinev, so here in the neighbouring estate of Trigorskoye Pushkin found a hospitable family with attractive, intelligent daughters to engage his affections and his poetry. To one of the Rayevsky daughters has been ascribed the famous digression on little feet in Chapter I. Pushkin wrote his final tragic and bitter St Petersburg chapter in Boldino, where on his engagement to Natalia Goncharova he had received 200 serfs from his father and so become a landowner. His most creative times were spent in Boldino, but his desire to settle there foundered on the demands of his wife and the Tsar, both of whom wanted him in the capital. While Pushkin was now at the height of his powers, his popularity started to wane as an indifferent, bourgeois reading public emerged and populist journalists began attacking aristocratic literature. Pushkin’s growing isolation left its tone on much of the last chapter. Even the critic Vissarion Belinsky, his champion in the next generation, called him a poet of the landowning class. Belinsky, a commoner, strove for an embattled and critical literature that would replace what he saw as Pushkin’s resigned acceptance of the status quo. Nevertheless, he described Onegin as an ‘encyclopedia of Russian life’. In the new intellectual world of Russia, divided into opposing camps, especially the Westernizers and Slavophiles, it was not possible to repeat Pushkin’s universality, at least not in verse, and in prose not before Tolstoy. Pushkin’s many-sidedness did indeed depend on the pivotal position of the minor nobility and the momentary hope for national unity that inspired its most remarkable members. It also required a reading public for which poetry was still the most meaningful literary idiom. Eugene Onegin generated themes and characters for subsequent writers, but as a form it remained unique. One or two poets, notably Mikhail Lermontov, attempted something similar, but without success. Pushkin himself uses the Onegin stanza again in a small fragment, Yezersky (1832), in which he laments the decline of the old nobility. The hero, descendant of an ancient lineage, is now a civil servant, so anticipating the deliberately named Eugene of The Bronze Horseman (1833), who, no longer a nobleman, is destroyed by one of the recurrent floods that invade Peter the Great’s historic city.
I uttered inwardly: it’s he!
Ivan Petrovich is inane,
I’ve been through them with little joy.
I’ve come to know new aspirations,
I’ve come to know new sadness, too;
I’ve known fair beauties unapproachable,
I’ve marvelled at their modish manner,
I’ve no more strength. I’ll make amends;
I’ve not the strength to be repenting,
I’ve opened up my soul to you?
I’ve scrutinized it all for any
I’ve scrutinized it all for any
I’ve seen like women in my days,
I’ve shut my eyelids now to phantoms;
I’ve suffered ballets long enough,
I view the steppe-land charms she’s brought.
I wait for you: you can inspirit
I wake each morning ready for
I wanted with Albani’s vision
I want you always on your guard.
I want you as a friend to go!
I was marked out for you from birth;
‘I was much younger at that meeting
I was not to your liking… Say, then,
‘I weep… if you recall your Tanya,
I wept for fear of what was looming;
I will, I will, without demur!
I would have found a friend for life,
I would have troubled you, dear fellow,
I would have wanted with due piety
I write, my heart’s no longer pining,
I write to you – what more is needed?
‘I?’ ‘Yes. The family’s celebrating
I
I
I
I
Jam, endless chatter with regard
2. Jam in small dishes: Home-made preserves – cherry, raspberry, strawberry, gooseberry, red and blackcurrant – were presented to guests in small glass dishes on a tray. In a variant Pushkin has with but one spoon for all’. The guests would transfer their helpings (by means of that spoon) on to their respective saucers and then would eat the jam with their teaspoons or mix it with their tea.
Jam in small dishes starts the ritual,
1837 27 January Provoked into duel with Baron D’Anth&#232;s, adopted son of Dutch ambassador, and shot in stomach. Died two days later. ‘Secret’ burial decreed to avoid expressions of public sympathy.
Jesting to make the guileless marvel,
6. John Bayley, Pushkin: A Comparative Commentary (London: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
6. joined the dust: Pushkin excluded the remaining ten lines of this stanza together with several others that were to follow stanza I. They offered a more extended and detailed poetic autobiography.
6. Juan and the Giaour: Poems by Byron.
Judge for yourself, my friend, it’s clear:
Judge, then, what roses for our wedding
Just as a sleepy convict might
Just let me have a pen, some paper.
Just like the daft moon shining there
Just look… that group… in front, you see…
Just so a casual guest one night
Just so! An earth that will ignore us
Just so indeed, with like elation,
Just what is meant by kinsfolk really.
7. Juvenal:(c. 42–c. 125 AD), Roman satirical poet, popular with the Decembrists (see Introduction) for his denunciations of despotism and depravity.
Kahn, Andrew (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Pushkin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006). Includes chapter on Onegin by Marcus Levitt
23. Kamenka: An estate on the Dnieper, belonging to V. L. Davydov, where the Southern Decembrists met and Pushkin stayed during his exile in Kishinev.
2. Kant: Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), German philosopher, author of three Critiques – of Pure Reason, Practical Reason and Judgement. His emphasis on imagination and genius in the third Critique influenced the Romantic movement in Germany and beyond.
31. Katenin: Pavel Katenin (1792–1853), playwright, critic and Decembrist, translated Corneille’s Le Cid, firing Decembrist ideals. See Chapter I, stanza 18.
Katenin reproduced the power
20. Kaverin: Pyotr Kaverin (1794–1855), hussar and duellist, school friend and companion of Pushkin during his early Petersburg years, student at G&#246;ttingen (1810–11) and Decembrist.
Keeps Monsieur Finemouche in her house
Keeps thinking of it anxiously.
Keep stirring my imagination,
Kept thinking of it secretly;
Khandra had cruelly chased and caught him,
51. khandra: Russian for ‘chondria’, asin ‘hypochrondia’.
Khandra was there, on guard and waiting,
20. Kharlikov: Another comic name meaning Throttle’.
2. kibitka: A hooded carriage.
Kindled at their poetic hearth,
5. king of kings: A paraphrase of Agamemnon’s title in the Iliad, often applied to Alexander I during the period 1813–15 by official publications. Another provenance is a song sung in the French opera in 1814.
Kishinev, Odessa, Mikhailovskoye, Moscow, St Petersburg and Boldino were the main places where Pushkin wrote Onegin (see Introduction).
Knew what love was in my young day;
Knows better than Chateaubriand,
29. Knyazhnin: Yakov Knyazhnin (1742–91), imitator of French tragedies and comedies.
5. Kura, Aragva: Caucasian rivers. The Kura is the most important river in Transcaucasia.
9. kvas: Russian national soft drink (sometimes mildly fermented), usually made of leavened rye, dough or rye bread with malt. In other varieties honey or fruit is used.
Lacking her sister’s beauty, poise,
12. Ladies’ Fashion: The full title is Journal of Ladies’ Fashions and refers to the French publication Journal des dames et des modes (1797–1838), which set the fashions throughout Europe. Tatiana, as Pushkin points out in Chapter III, stanza 26, line 6, did not read Russian journals, nor did a specific women’s fashion journal exist in Russia.
Ladies sit by the chimney-place;
17. Lafontaine: Not the fabulist Jean de Lafontaine, but August Lafontaine (1759–1831), a mediocre German writer, ‘author of numerous family novels’ (Pushkin’s note), popular in Russia at the end of the eighteenth century.
La morale est dans la nature des choses.
1. La morale… Necker: ‘Morality is in the nature of things.’ Jacques Necker (1732–1804) was a politician and financier, minister in Louis XVI’s government at the beginning of the French Revolution and father of Mme de Sta&#235;l, who quotes Pushkin’s epigraph in her Considerations sur les Principaux Ev&#233;nements de la Revolution Fran&#231;aise (Considerations on the Principal Events of the French Revolution, 1818).
Languished in unproductive leisure;
Lapsed into pensive indolence:
La, sotto i giorni nubilosi e brevi,
1. La, sotto… non dole: ‘There, where the days are cloudy and short, A race is born for whom death is not painful.’ A quotation from Petrarch’s In vita di Laura, Canzone XXVIII, which misses out the middle line: Nemica naturalmente di pace’ (‘By nature the enemy of peace’). The omission allows the quotation to refer more easily to Pushkin’s own generation.
Last evening in such casual fashion
‘Last night, why did you leave so early?’
Lay in his soul’s depravity,
Lay leafing through a book in bed;
Lay until morning, in his home,
Leads forth the folk who’ll be attending
Leads to two pines with roots entwined,
Leaning upon a ledge of granite,
Leaning upon the dam stood Lensky
Leave now the noisy city spaces
Leaves in the snow a small, wet boot,
16. leaving boat for ball: An allusion to Griboyedov’s Woe from Wit, referring to the hero Chatsky’s return to Moscow in 1819 after three years abroad.
11. Lel: Artificial god of love derived by eighteenth-century writers from chants and cries associated with wedding ceremonies (lyuli, lel’, lelyo).
Lel hovering above her head,
Lending the trees a downy cover,
Lensky, a hapless victim, fell…
Lensky, at home, with hatred blazing,
Lensky, a wealthy youth and handsome,
Lensky replied to the old dame:
(Lensky’s estate) there lives and thrives
Lensky, the poet, is, like Onegin, part of Pushkin himself, writing the kind of elegiac poetry that his creator had written in an earlier phase and that recurs in the digressions. But there is also an exalted strain in him that belongs, on the one hand, to the civic Romanticism associated with the Decembrists and, on the other, to the libertarian ideals brought back from his studies in G&#246;ttingen. In the text Pushkin chooses a more prosaic future for Lensky, had he lived – that of the gouty, cuckolded landowner. It is unlikely that this Lensky could be added to Edmund Wilson’s list of poets unable survive in a world of ‘prose’, since he is not of their mould, and his alternative future – to become another Ryleyev, Nelson, Kutuzov – is left tongue-in-cheek in the omitted stanza. Among the epithets attaching to Lensky are: ‘virginal’, ‘pure’, ‘sweet’, ‘tender’, ‘rapturous’, ‘exalted’, ‘enthusiastic’, ‘inspired’, ‘ardent’, simple’. The words ‘vague’, ‘obscure’, ‘limp’, ‘ideal’, ‘tearful’ apply to his poetry. The subjects of his verse are ‘love’, ‘despond’, ‘parting’, ‘graves’, even ‘Romantic roses’. The last image of him is his own grave. He and Tatiana share to some extent a similar sensibility. Not for nothing does she refer to Onegin as ‘the slayer of her brother’ (Chapter VII, stanza 14).
Lent his young mind a novel thrill.
9. Leonora: Heroine of the much-translated Lenore by Burger.
17. Lepage’s fatal tubes: Jean Lepage (1779–1822) was a Parisian gunsmith.
Lepage’s fatal tubes till needed,
Lesson from me on how to tell
Lest I forget of whom I sing.
Lest somewhere a sarcastic reader
Let drop his pistol to the ground.
14. Lethe: River of fortgetfulness in Greek mythology.
Let me acquaint you with this fellow,
Let me acquaint you with this fellow,
Let me glance back. Farewell, you arbours
Let not a poet’s soul be frozen,
Let not a poet’s soul be frozen,
Let others profit by his lesson,
Let Pradt and Scott divert your mind
‘Let’s go, then.’ At their destination
Let’s hear the oak wood’s sound ascending
Let’s sprinkle you with holy water,
Let’s talk of how things used to be.’
Let’s visit them, they’ll be delighted;
Let them append here how and why.
Let us go thither where a brook,
Let us lure a fine young lad
Let us scatter, darling ones,
Let us sing a song we know,
26. liberty’s admirers: The Russian has: ‘Where everyone, breathing liberty’, a Gallicism from ‘respirer l’air de la libert&#233;’. At the Decembrist rising, the poet Ryleyev remarked: We are breathing freedom.’
Lies a young maiden’s looking glass.
Lies down in carpets undulating
Life in old age is such a horror.’
Life’s still, as yet, unfinished novel,
Life’s thread at this prodigious source:
Light-hearted, free of care, serene –
Light vapour eddied under it.
Like a small child, defencelessly.
Like Chatsky, leaving boat for ball.
Like drunken Delvig at a feast.
Like ghosts in tedious succession.
Like him, disdaining vanity,
Like him, poor taxman at his term?
Like him, she dressed to match the fashion
Like him, the clerk of Tula town?
Like Hippocrene it sparkles, flashes
(Like lover’s dream, another vanity)
Like Muslims in their paradise,
Like rosy lips unused to smiling,
Like some forbidding phantom gazing,
Like those established long ago…’
Like those that praised our mighty nation,
Like vernal storms on meadows sprung:
Like women, books he now deserted,
Like you and me and everyone?
Like young life’s whirl, when spirits soar,
Like your light trace on meadow grass.
25. Limburg’s cheese’s living mass: Sharp, strong, soft and runny Belgian cheese, hence perhaps the epithet ‘living’ or, alternatively, because of the ‘living dust’ of microbes that covered it.
Listened to Eugene’s homily.
Listen to my avowal now;
Lives like a sage, discovering solace
‘Lives near St Simeon’s; last December,
Long did she gaze as through a mist…
Long in my soul your voice resounded…
Long live Bordeaux, our precious friend!
Long was his heart with grief afflicted,
Looked forward warmly to befriending
Looked like a giddy Venus wearing
Looked through the magic crystal’s eye,
Looked through the window, swatted flies.
Look now – the square has put on motley.
‘Look quickly to the left, my dear.’
Looks at the stage, then turns away –
Looks he’d forgotten long ago.
Looks round her room, already bright,
Lord Byron’s portrait on the wall,
Lord Byron’s whim most opportunely
Lorgnettes when once the ballet’s started.
Lost in the village where I languish
Love, hatred, joy and sorrow out.
Love is for every age auspicious,
Love passed, the Muse resumed dominion
Love’s aching words upon my tongue,
Love’s charming dreams in former days
Love’s mad alarms will not deceive me,
Love’s pangs continued to torment her,
Love your own self, be your own man,
Loving one thing exclusively,
L’s dagger… B’s shadow
Ludicrous villains, dull, outsmarted
Luk&#225;cs, G., Russian Realism in World Literature (London: Merlin Press, 1970). Includes ‘Pushkin’s Place in World Literature’
18. Lunin… decisive measures: Mikhail Sergeyevich Lunin (1787–1845), guards officer, reveller and member of all the Decembrist societies. His decisive measures’ refer, it seems, to a plan for assassinating the Tsar put forward by him in 1816. Pushkin befriended him on leaving the lyc&#233;e.
2. Lyovshin: Vasily Lyovshin (1746–1826), a Tula landowner and prolific author of a vast range of subjects. Known in the 1820s for his books Flower Gardens and Vegetable Gardens and A Manual of Agriculture (1802–4). The school’s ‘fledglings’ are gentry and country landowners.
24. Lyubov Petrovna, Ivan Petrovich… Semyon Petrovich: These three are siblings.
Madame de Sta&#235;l, Chamfort in tandem,
5. Madame… passed on her trust: Refugees from revolutionary France were employed as tutors by aristocratic families.
Madame took on his supervision,
Mad conversation of the heart,
Made light of everything he taught
Made rough and hard, reduced to bone
Made rough and hard, reduced to bone
Madman, to overcome their sting?
37. magnetism: ‘Magnetism’ became a fashionable word at the time to designate immaterial influences.
Magnificent, resplendent albums,
Maidens prefer the tomcat chants.
Maid of the mountains, and of all
Maids’ secrets, secrets of the heart,
Maintains a bachelor family;
Majestic and intelligent,
3. Makaryev: Annual fair originating outside the Makaryev monastery some sixty miles east of Nizhny and transferred into the town in 1817.
Makaryev, kicking up a shindy,
Make sure their voices can be heard).
Making no sense of this she quietly
Malek Adhel and de Linar,
6. Malek Adhel: Hero of Mathilde, ou M&#233;moires tires de l’histoire des croisades (Mathilde or the Crusades, 1805), a novel by Sophie Cottin (1774–1807), described by Pushkin in his note as mediocre’. Malek Adel is a Muslim general at the time of the Third Crusade who falls in love with Princesse Mathilde, sister of Richard Lionheart.
Malfil&#226;tre
14. Malvina: A novel by Mme Cottin (1773–1807).
Mansions, Bokharans, small plantations,
Mantled by storms, with waves contending,
13. Many, like myself… distant parts: Ibid., p. 213 .
30. Manzoni, Gibbon: Alessandro Manzoni (1785–1873), Italian novelist, author of I promessi sposi (The Betrothed, 1825–7), which laid the basis for modern literary Italian. Edward Gibbon (1737–94), English historian. Onegin would have read his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776–88) in a French translation.
Manzoni, Gibbon and Rousseau,
Map
Marked by the naval cannonry,
16. Marmontel: Jean-Francois Marmontel (1723–99), French author; volume 3 of his complete works, all of which Pushkin possessed, contained his Contes moraux (Moral Tales).
Married a son quite recently.
1831 Married in February. Settled in St Petersburg. Completed Onegin.
Mars, Bacchus, Venus were his pleasures:
13. Martin Zadek:A fictitious person probably invented in Switzerland in the eighteenth century. His book of prophecies and divinations, the impressive title of which is too long to reproduce here, was translated from German into Russian and published in three separate editions (1814, 1821, 1827).
7. Maybe… done it, too: The Russian word for maybe’ is the colloquial and popular avos, meaning on the off chance’. The ‘high-bornrhymester’ is Prince Dolgoruky (1764–1823), a satirical salon poet who addressed a poem to the word. Pushkin may have come across Byron’s use of shibboleth’ in Don Juan, XI, 12, 1 – 2: ‘Juan, who did not understand a word / Of English, save their shibboleth, “God damn!”’
Maybe, O shibboleth of the nation,
Maybe the fraud, his rents forgetting,
Maybe they will repair the highways
10. Maybe Tsar Nicholas… free: In 1830 Pushkin continued to hope for Tsar Nicholas’s mercy towards the exiled Decembrists. Here the tone is ironical.
Maybe Tsar Nicholas, regretting,
1799 26 May Born in Moscow. Father of ancient Muscovite aristocratic lineage; mother a granddaughter of Abyssinian General Abram Gannibal (hero of Pushkin’s unfinished novel The Negro of Peter the Great).
May cause my stomach some abuse.
May from his prison-house take flight.
May God consume you with his fire!
‘May the good Lord protect his daughter!’
Mazurkas entertain the crowd;
Meadows and golden cornfields, patched
Meantime, I need my recompenses
Meanwhile, apparelled for the morning
Meanwhile, enjoy, friends, till it’s ended,
Meanwhile, imagination’s dealing
Meanwhile, inside a pitch-sealed bottle
Meanwhile omitting certain sections
Meanwhile, Onegin’s visitation
Meanwhile, the moon was radiating
Mechanically (the word in fashion)
14. Melmoth: Pushkin’s note: ‘Melmoth, Maturin’s work of genius.’ Charles Robert Maturin (1782–1824), an Irish clergyman, wrote Melmoth the Wanderer (1820), a long Satanic horror tale.
32. Melpomene: The Greek Muse of tragedy. Pushkin took a negative view of Russian tragedy at the time, arguing for a Shakespearean theatre in place of bad imitations of Racine.
Men’s talk and horses stamping floors!
Me out in no uncertain way.’
Mercy, does it not drive you crazy
Mere affectation – nothing more.
Mere boy, by Olga captivated,
Merely to while away the time,
Methodical by intuition:
10. Mickiewicz sang his passion: Adam Bernard Mickiewicz (1798–1855), Polish poet, spent four and a half years in Russia, visiting the Crimea in 1825 and composing the Crimean Sonnets. A friend of Pushkin until the Polish uprising of 1830, the suppression of which Pushkin enthusiastically supported.
Midst children, crafty and faint-hearted,
‘midst daily pleasures to indulge in?
Midst empty halls of luxury?…
Midst fools who shine in very role,
Midst hills in semi-circle lying,
‘Midst maids and ladies round her throne.
Midst modish scenes that daily hail
‘midst splendid conquests and affairs,
Midst swaggerers bereft of soul,
Midst the banal inanity
Midst the coquettes, devout and fervent,
Midst the forbidding dispensations
Midst those who play the part of servant,
Might it not be because convention
Might it not be because my shame
‘Might she not be in love?’ ‘With whom, then?’
Might well have been quite commonplace.
Might well have proved, by seeking peace,
Might well have said its ‘dirty quarry’,
Migrating south: already dawning,
59. Millionaya: A street in Petersburg, alluding to Katenin’s habit of returning from the theatre at this hour to his regimental barracks on Millionaya Street.
Minion of Fame by chance entirely,
Mist settled on the fields, the peace
9. Mithridates: King of Pontus, who in 63 BC ordered a Gallic mercenary to kill him.
12. Moldavia: Part of the province of Bessarabia, where Pushkin was exiled 1820–24. The Gipsies (1824), written later in Odessa and Mikhailovskoye, his family estate, drew its material from the environs of Kishinev, capital of Bessarabia.
Monotonous and madly whirling,
25. Monsieur Finemouche: Probably a French tutor.
Monsieur l’Abb&#233;, a threadbare Frenchman,
Monsieur Triquet within its fold;
Monsieur was straightway driven hence.
15. Morali: Born in Tunis, Morali (Ali) was a sea captain, suspected of piracy. He cut an extravagant figure in Odessa and was a close friend of Pushkin who referred to him as the Corsair (hero of Byron’s eponymous poem).
More agitated in her manner
More candidly than many a life.
More clearly now the true persona
More often, though, it was the passions
More often to my corner fly.
More pleasant, friends, if he howls out:
More than in any other art,
More wondrous, more intimidating,
More worthy of your soul’s perfection,
28. Morpheus: God of sleep.
Moscow, it was of you I thought!
Moscow, Nizhny Novgorod, Astrakhan, the Caucasus and the Crimea are the stages of Onegin’s journey.
Moscow, Russia’s favourite daughter,
Moscow, whose name reverberated
Mother and Olen’ka are waiting:
Mourned by the neighbour of the manor,
Mouths chew; and, meanwhile, all about,
Much water have I mixed, alas.
27. Muryavyov: To be distinguished from Nikita Muravyov in note 17 above. He is Sergei Ivanovich Muravyov-Apostol, mentioned in note 14.
Must at the mill ere break of day
Must take her to his regiment.
Mute monument of his reflections,
64. my Africa: In his note 11 Pushkin refers the reader to the first edition of the chapter, where he provides an extended footnote on his African forebears.
My blood runs cold now – God above! –
(My Chapter One you will recall),
‘My dear good woman, why not send her
‘My dear, I vow by the Almighty.’
My dear Tatiana’s heart! If she
My deeds and diction need improving,
My dreaming maid whom he rejected;
My Eugene drew the same conclusions.
My Eugene, like Chaadaev, fearful
My fashionable house, soir&#233;es,
My fate is settled. Injudicious
My father blessed me. Bitterly
My friend, however, walked right by,
My friend Onegin was begotten
My friend Onegin was begotten
My friends, this makes no sense, I know it.
My friends, you’re sorry for the poet:
My giddy mistress made me proud.
My goddesses! Where now? Forsaken?
My goddesses! Where now? Forsaken?
My God, how wrong, how I’ve been punished!
My grief for his unhappy lot.
My heart’s inertia vivify,
My heart to anyone on earth!
My high society successes,
My hoping heart with just one glance
My hour of freedom, is it coming?
My irrepressible Buyanov
My labour’s fruits I shall deliver
My last poor penny on its solace.
My Lensky, watching this take place,
My life depends on your decision
My life has been a precondition
My lips will study how to move
My mind back to a bygone past?
My Moscow spurned such self-abasement,
My Muse to join a worldly rout;
My naive longings (but who knows?);
My native land and my confinement?
My novel started its career);
My own confession, just as artless;
My pen has lost its former pleasures
My pen no longer wanders, making
My pleasure when a semi-circle
My poor, poor Lensky! Pining, aching,
My publisher will not allow
‘My second? Yes, let me present him,
Myself like Byron, bard of pride,
Myself to you. I wonder whether,
My service to you lest you suffer;
My ship reflects the star of morning –
My soul retained their secret image
My springtime’s ever-golden days?
My springtime’s fancies, high-flown themes
My student cell was inundated
My tears out at your feet, to press,
My thanks to you for the enjoyments,
My thanks to you. I have delighted
24. my thirtieth year: Pushkin was twenty-eight when he wrote this stanza.
My translation succeeds the earlier Penguin version by Charles Johnston, which was the first to put Pushkin’s poem on the map in English-speaking countries, inspiring Vikram Seth’s The Golden Gate and other imitations. Yet its aura is old-fashioned like those autumnal productions of Chekhov that once flourished on the British stage. The first major translator of Onegin, Oliver Elton (1937), mourned the ‘nobleness’ that had vanished from English literature by 1880 and found most nineteenth-century Russian writers unhealthy and repellent. Pushkin was an oasis for him – light, gay and authentically religious, unlike Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy. But there is little lightness about his translation, which is full of eighteenth – or early nineteenth-century phraseology – ‘thou’, ‘thee’, ‘tis’, ‘twas’, ‘fain’, ‘nay’ and many inversions and contortions. It might perhaps be argued in favour of such a diction that, since Onegin is about the squirearchy and nobility at the beginning of the nineteenth century, a period flavour is appropriate. However, Pushkin’s language is modern by comparison with Elton’s and is felt to be modern in Russia today.
My uncle is a man of honour,
My version, feeble, incomplete,
My wish to do so has abated.
My worthy, venerable reader!
My young poetical endeavour;
My youthful days sped helter-skelter.
(Nabokov’s translation)
Naivet&#233; risks a dangerous end.’
2. ‘nakedness’ in prose: Pushkin talks of ‘the charm of naked simplicity’, Polnoye sobranie sochinenii, izd. AN SSSR (1937–50), vol. 11, p. 121.
Naples’ volcano was astir,
Nasce una gente a cui ‘l morir non dole.
Nature, not yet from sleep returning,
Nature, now pale and tremulous,
Naught touched Onegin to the core
Nay, I shall see you and rejoice,
Near waters shining tranquilly,
Necker
Neighbours are many in this part,
Neither the worldly gossiping,
Never, in carefree languor, counted,
          Never know these fearful dreams,
1. Never know… Zhukovsky: Epigraph from concluding lines of Zhukovsky’s ballad Svetlana (1812), which was considered a model of Romantic poetry based on folklore. Svetlana shadows Tatiana in this chapter.
Nevertheless, from head to foot,
Nevertheless, the characters are not of the kind we find in a realist prose novel. They are silhouettes. The encounters between Onegin and Tatiana are few, and the decisive ones are the responses to letters. There is a simple symmetry about their relationship: Tatiana falls in love with Onegin and is rejected; Onegin falls in love with her and is rejected. It is the symmetry of a mathematical equation or a chemical formula of the kind that Goethe pursues in his novel The Elective Affinities (1809). It gives the relationship between hero and heroine a spare objectivity that is consolidated by the central preoccupations of the novel – the nature of passion, romantic love, romantic literature, libertinage, marriage, the position of women, morality. Neither Onegin nor Tatiana develops slowly; they jump from situation to situation like film cuts. Pushkin agreed with his friend Katenin that the result of omitting the former Chapter VIII (Onegin’s Journey) was to make ‘the transition from Tatiana the provincial miss to Tatiana the grande dame… too unexpected and unexplained’ (Foreword to Fragments of Onegin’s Journey). But it is not just a question of excising a chapter. The characters are not the ‘independent’ actors of prose fiction. They are half-lyrical, half-novelistic. This is obvious in Chapter I, where Pushkin enters the story as Onegin’s friend, sharing the same discontent. They cross one another’s paths twice again in the novel, in Onegin’s Journey (stanza 10), when Onegin traverses the same route in the Caucasus that Pushkin had taken at the beginning of his exile, and in a variant, when they meet face to face in Odessa. Yet Pushkin is quick to disclaim identification with him. What we see in Chapter I is a fusion of poet and hero, followed by their parting, when Onegin is invited to his uncle’s deathbed, and resumes his separate status. But Pushkin’s friendship and their travel plans give Onegin a deeper sensibility than was evident before. The theme of exile unites them both – self-imposed for Onegin, who flees his killing of Lensky. Even after this Pushkin continues to speak indulgently of his hero. At the end of the novel Pushkin bids farewell to his ‘strange comrade’ (the Russian word sputnik can mean ‘travelling companion’). Onegin is part Pushkin’s earlier self.
Night’s shades already are receding,
17. Nikita’s… debate: Nikita Mikhailovich Muravyev (1796–1843) was one of the most active members of the secret societies, formulating a plan for a constitution. He was sentenced to twenty years’ hard labour. Pushkin knew him in the lyc&#233;e. Ilya Andreyevich Dolgorukov (1798–1848) was a member of the Union of Welfare, one of the main Decembrist organizations. No action was taken against him as a result of the intervention of his commanding officer, Grand Duke Mikhail Pavlovich.
2. nine Camenae: Roman water nymphs identified with the nine Greek Muses.
Nine cantos done, and ninth the wave
NN’s an estimable man.
Nobles and fashion’s exemplars,
Nobody listens, ladies squeal.
No dearth of silliness and follies,
‘No doubt the post has kept him busy.’
No epigram’s vulgarity,
No fancy could imagine it:
No fiery boy, no fighting kind,
No, gentlemen, write odes, that’s it,
No gift, no feast day she declared,
No hope! He drives from the reception,
No hymn will rush to where he’s laid,
No, in her passion near to madness
Noise, arguments – light wine is brought
Noise, laughter, crush as more folk spill in,
Noise, laughter, galop, waltz, mazurka,
No labour’s heard upon the fields;
No less than haughty Muscovites.
No longer does the herdsman drive
19. No&#235;ls were brought and read by Pushkin: Pushkin was not present here, since he was not admitted to conspiratorial meetings. In any case, the occasion he refers to took place in Moscow in 1817. But he read his no&#235;ls at other gatherings. The no&#235;l is a French Christmas carol with a topical reference. Pushkin’s no&#235;ls are political parodies of the form. Only one remains.
No&#235;ls were brought and read by Pushkin,
No matter, fate’s decree is right.
1817–20 Nominal government appointment in Foreign Office, St Petersburg. Life of dissipation. ‘Free-thinking’ acquaintances (future Decembrists).
No more at noontime does he sound
None could have found in her what would,
None could have said she was a beauty,
No, never did a passion’s squall
No, never did I in the fire
Nonsense to which a lover’s prone;
4. No one respects Don Juan… introduction: Letter of 24 March 1825, Pushkin, Sobranie Sochinenii, vol. 9, p.144.
No one respects Don Juan more than I do… but it hasn’t anything in common with Onegin. You compare the satire of the Englishman Byron with mine, and demand the same thing of me! No, my dear fellow, you are asking a lot. Where is my satire? There’s not a hint of it in Eugene Onegin. The foundations of Petersburg would crack if I touched satire. – The very word ‘satirical’ should not have entered the preface. Wait for the other cantos… Canto One is merely a rapid introduction.
Nor anything the following day.
Nor anything to give her solace
Nor by the social mob constricted,
Nor did he join that cocky parish
Nor do her cheeks give up their glow,
Nor foreign beauties he could choose,
Nor game of boston, then in swing,
Nor hours devoted to the Muse,
Nor lengthy years of separation,
Nor let a worm with venom slither
Nor merry noise, nor meditation
Nor modish experts train a glass,
Nor passions that one might declare.
Nor peoples come to bless his shade.
Nor pursed her lips a bit too tight.
Nor see a flower two days old,
Nor the entreaties or the jests,
Nor turn insane, nor did he die.
Nor was it that she had rejected
No saws or pictures could be seen,
No: soon a coldness numbed his feeling;
No sooner had he finished reading
Not all, like me, will understand,
Not blaming you: at that dark time
Not cold, standoffish, not ungracious,
Not cooling distance’s relief,
Not courting praise, I live and write,
Notelets are brought to greet the day –
Notes
NOTES
NOTES
Notes
Not even joy, not only sorrow
Not even Ladies’ Fashion could
Not for the first time; though ill-wishers
Not harking to his mind’s stern censures,
Not having fallen yet from grace,
Not having read at all, would see
Nothing betrays her self-possession.
Nothing but dinners in a row,
Nothing proceeded from his quill,
Nothing to make her soul less bleak.
No, this was not a dream for me!
Not ice and flame, not stone and water,
Not in an elegiac cloak,
‘Not in the least.’ ‘I am nonplussed.
Not knowing a tormented heart,
Not knowing what it presages,
Not known in her simplicity
Not long did his beloved weep,
Not one of them appears to know.
Not only did she not take flight now,
Not possible? Ah, she repels him,
Not possible; and, in impatience,
Not Seneca, not Scott, not Byron,
Not tell a trochee from an iamb,
Not verse and prose are from each other
Not wander on so waywardly.’
Not wishing to prolong his stay,
Not without fault, he also knew.
November stood outside the gate.
Now a coquette, a giddy child!
Now acting proud and now submissive,
Now at a hillock, now a stream
Now, friends, I hear you put to me,
Now let us condescend to spying
Now, looking quietly, she sits,
‘Now march,’ came the command. And readily,
Now my ideal’s a housewife – like her,
Now Olen’ka like him was yawning,
Now other days, now other dreams,
Now our Onegin, country dweller,
Now taciturn, now gay. Somehow,
Now talkative, now mute; with her
Now tea is served. We hear no chimes:
Now the goddess, so very distant,
Now the mazurka has resounded.
Now this old duellist has meddled
Now, watchman of the desolation,
Now with what eager concentration
Nursed proudly in his poetry
‘Nurse, leave, I want to be alone.
Nursing the flame of purest passion,
O Adriatic waves, o Brenta!
Obedient to the bent of feeling?
Obligingly by what we say?
Oblivion, when the tempest buffets,
Observe your daughters’ etiquette
13. Ochakov medal: Ochakov, on the Black Sea, was seized from the Turks in 1788 by Suvorov, under whom Larin served. The commemorative medal was given to all officers taking part in the campaign. Brigadier (a general’s rank) Larin might have expected the more illustrious ‘order’. Pushkin might have wanted thereby to keep Larin ordinary.
Odessa in resounding rhyme,
O epic Muse, of my exertions,
Of actresses, who are the rage,
Of adolescent turbulence,
Of alien fads an explication,
Of all attachment to this life,
Of all his kinsfolk, in a post-chaise,
Of all your elegies appears,
Of an A&#237; when out it fizzes…
Of ancient lore, believed in dreams,
Of a new ballet that’s begun.
Of an impassioned maid’s affliction
Of army fops, corps diplomatic
Of aspens, birches, lindens bare,
Of beauty inexplicable.
Of bitter scorn for what I send.
Of Black Sea waves upon the shore…
Of both his father and his mother…
Of bygone times, which he’d relay,
Of churches, belfries, gardens, halls
Of comme il faut (a phrase which I,
Of complicated calumny
Of contemplative disposition
of Corneille’s genius; there the scathing
Of countryside simplicity,
‘Of course, dear, I’m at your command.’
Of course, it was not just Onegin
Of course, I wonder where he’s gone?’
Of course, you’ve more than once encountered
Of crimson dawn’s already playing;
Of cruel-hearted vanity,
Of custom and the sudden way
Of daubing fleeting leaves, it seems,
Of debts and other bills to foot,
Of distant, dark eternity,
Of droshkies in Millionaya.
Of drunkards stamping the trepak.
Of etiquette and worldly canon,
Of every salon, one whose heart
Of faith, of fiery supplication,
Of famine or another war,
Of fancies that in song she f&#234;ted,
Of feelings, thoughts and magic sound.
Of flute, bassoon – the army band.
Of foreign words and like abuses,
Of frostdust form a silver spray.
Off to Talon’s: he’s sure that therein,
Off to the banks of Nevsky river
Of heart’s affairs he had no knowledge,
Of heirs to the estate is raised,
Of high thoughts and simplicity;
Of him; by some enchanted force
Of him or the astonishment
Of how together they might wend
O fields! I am your devotee!
Of immature and withered years,
Of its digressions, when it ends.
Of jealous censure, was most careful
Of ladies, and outlandish men –
Of land, wood, water, factory
Of laughter resonate; their eyes,
Of Lensky and Onegin, for example, Alexander Herzen, exiled revolutionary of the decade succeeding Pushkin, wrote:
Of Lensky’s heart. Such thoughts soon ceased.
Of love and suffering I incurred
Of love she says not: let’s postpone it
Of love until the final hours;
O flowers, country, love, inaction,
Of maidens and of spirits fell;
Of making other minds his own;
Of memories of ancientness
Of men, and blind Fortuna’s gaze,
Of modish belles the modish foe,
Of modish words a lexicon,
Of Moscow’s popinjays and Circes!
Of my ebullient youth desire
Of old-world hospitality.
Of Olga – such is love’s refrain!
Of oligarchic colloquies,
Of once-familiar little feet
Of order and a wasteful fellow),
14. O fountain of Bakhchisaray: Pushkin’s narrative poem The Fountain of Bakhchisaray, composed in 1822 and published in 1824. Zarema is one of two female characters.
O fountain of Bakhchisaray, say!
Of our benign enlightenment,
Of philosophic measurement,
Of poetry and clear reflection,
Of poetry he might have wearied,
Of priceless recompense prophetic,
Of public tears and acclamation
Of restful sleep. Alone Eugene
Of resurrecting dead ideas.
Of Richardson and of Rousseau.
Of richest blooms and sweetest fruits.
Of rugs that yielded to your tread,
Of rural prospects, small and simple,
Of Russian poetry of the time –
Of sabre, lead and martial strife.
Of schemes, of thoughts and conversations,
Of secrets of the heart she keeps.
Of seeing for myself your Phyllis,
Of seeming jealous, hiding hope,
Of sensible tranquillity,
Of simple maidens’ thoughts, of infant
Of sleepless nights, light inspirations,
Of something and the dim beyond,
Of stern morality no henchman,
Of strolls and rest, then I’ll conclude.
Of sudden thought the drawn-out trace,
Of tedious pictures row on row,
Of that exhilerating life
Of the preceding age and mellow,
Of this unlooked-for tryst, dear friends,
Of those, who, with their wicked smile,
Of trees, its sonorous accents calling.
Of vapour, just apparent, hovers;
Of Volga fishermen, while plaiting
Of wandering tribes, and, living with them,
Of watch-endangering excursions;
Of whom the world’s opinion ran:
Of wicked years, and ancient men –
Of yawning peasants at thanksgiving,
Of young, mustachioed blades who strut,
Of youthful feeling, youthful thought,
Oh, by the way, your Larina
Oh come, friend, does it matter so?
Oh come into my golden hall…
Oh give me enemies in preference!
Oh hearken to my call, I rue:
Oh hearken to my call, I rue:
Oh how I wished to join their races
‘Oh how our years go flying by!’
Oh, ineffectual phantom seeker,
Oh, I’ve no strength… my poor, tired chest…
‘Oh, just the house – and garden there.
Oh, last night I was so afeard!
‘Oh look, that’s me there!’ like a lout;
Oh, much by fate has been undone!
Oh, my poor Lensky, he at heart
‘Oh, nowadays my head’s a muddle.
‘Oh nurse, I need a favour, listen.’
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m not interested.
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m unhappy, aching,
‘Oh really, nurse, you are slow-witted!’
‘Oh, she’s the sister who appeared
Oh, Tanya, tell, who can it be?’
O humans! You’re so similar
49. Okhta: An outlying region of St Petersburg, populated by Finns supplying the capital’s dairy needs. The ‘Okhta girl’ is a milkmaid.
Old Mother Winter’s frolicking.
Old tales that, true or false, I’d tell
Old women smiled as she passed by,
Olga alone holds his attention,
Olga, he thought, would be upset
Olga’s adorer drove up. ‘Tell us,
Olga, too, has her linguistic aura, more limited than those of the main characters. These vocabularies have their counterparts in European literature. Tatiana’s and Onegin’s reading are entirely European. The comic Russian debate on the merits of the ode and elegy contextualize Lensky’s poetry in Chapter IV (stanzas 32–4). These ramifications extend the range of the characters, turning them from individuals into types. Nor is it just a linguistic matter. Pushkin is quite serious about the ‘immorality’ of contemporary Western literature and its baleful effect upon vulnerable young female readers in Russia. In testing the characters against these influences Pushkin creates a clearing-house for a new, as yet undefined literature. But this clearing-house was to become its greatest monument. In his novel-in-verse Pushkin takes the same path of ‘lost illusions’ as Balzac was to do. Lensky is pointlessly killed without becoming either a hero or a cuckold; Onegin is left stranded at the end of the novel. Tatiana alone adapts herself sorrowfully to the high society she loathes, unlike the heroines of her favourite novels who die in order to save their integrity.
26. omber: A card game of Spanish origin, popular in Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
On britska, coach, kibitka, sleigh.
On business or without, run hotly,
Once by the sea, a storm impending,
Once I myself found it a treat,
Once Martin Zadek casts his spell,
Once more. Behind a stump nearby
Once more I love, once more I smart!…
Once more its contact has ignited
Once more Onegin cannot fit
Once more pursued sweet vanity.
Once used to you, I’d cease to love
Once, Vyazemsky, on meeting Tanya
Once, when you heard its thunder peal,
On Christmas Eve he called on me:
On eating, secretly, a berry
One can’t but love one’s native Moscow.
One customary, single grief.
One customary, single mission,
Onegin, and bid him goodbye.
Onegin, chuckling and reviving,
Onegin fired… the moment fated
Onegin flies off to the theatre,
Onegin, from his chair, eyes flashing,
Onegin hurries with his dressing,
‘Onegin, I must go, goodbye.’
Onegin looks with lamentation
Onegin once more busies us.
Onegin pales, can hardly function.
Onegin peers with searching gaze:
Onegin pines away, is he
Onegin’s difference from me,
Onegin, shuddering, swiftly flies
Onegin sighed with some regrets
Onegin sleeps on at his leisure,
Onegin’s Letter to Tatiana
Onegin snatches up a knife,
Onegin’s taken Lensky’s life.
Onegin stands with upraised arm,
Onegin stayed at Olga’s side,
Onegin steals a quick look for
Onegin then approached her, said:
Onegin then to Lensky called:
Onegin then visits Tauris:
Onegin to the boulevard
Onegin to the window went
Onegin travels to Astrakhan, and thence to the Caucasus.
Onegin waits: here’s Lensky, splendid!
Onegin was prepared to travel
Onegin was profoundly stirred;
Onegin was to many people
Onegin watched Vladimir’s going.
Onegin, whom he’d newly met.
16. Onegin will either perish… Decembrist movement: Yu. M. Lotman, Roman A. S. Pushkina Evgeny Onegin Kommentarii (Leningrad: ‘Prosveshcheniye, 1983), p. 316.
Onegin will not want to wait.’
Onegin, you recall, do you,
One moment earlier inspiration
One must obey a strict tradition
One or two minutes spent on chat,
3. One poet: In a note Pushkin refers to Vyazemsky and his poem ‘The First Snow’ (1819). The epigraph from Chapter I is likewise taken from Vyazemsky’s poem.
One poet, rich in stylization,
One still can be a man of action
One that we all cherish so,
On everything Eugene was mute,
One winter would be worth the price.
One with a dog’s face, horned, abnormal,
On furs at the theatre doors;
On furs at the theatre doors;
On grass in spring or when they rest
On her designs he did not frown,
On horseback through the fields alone,
On it the Chinese teapot, warming;
On Kamenka in shady cover
On ladies whom he can’t recall;
On land again, let’s send our greeting
Only a deathly pallor covered
Only infuriate my mood.
Only pedestrians on stilts
Only the mad soul of a poet
On my capricious Muse depending,
On noticing his friend had vanished,
On 4 November 1823 Pushkin wrote to a friend, Prince Vyazemsky, from Odessa: ‘I am writing now not a novel, but a novel in verse – the devil of a difference. Something like Don Juan – there’s no point in thinking about publication; I’m writing whatever comes into my head.’ Odessa was Pushkin’s second place of exile after Kishinev, in Bessarabia. In Odessa he was in the employ of the Governor Count Vorontsov, who had little appreciation for his poetry, calling him ‘a weak imitator of a writer whose usefulness may be said to be very slight – Lord Byron’. The zest with which Pushkin wrote his new work reflected a hectic life that included an affair with the Governor’s wife.
On our sad snows you left no imprint:
On pages meant for recollections,
On peasant farmers badly off;
On plains by the Dnieper watered
On Saturdays to use the bathhouse,
On Schiller’s verse by candlelight.
On seeing in the distant brush
On seeing in the distant brush
On Tanya’s youth a darkness lowers;
On these he concentrated most,
On top of that, they are so gracious,
On to the balcony, unsteady,
On to the flooded fields below;
On Trinity, among the throngs
On what our heroes have to say.
On wide arcs over waterways,
Opened and shut his vasisdas.
Opened to me inside the walls.
Open the window, sit by me.’
Oppressed her like a grievous dream.
Or a digressive stanza tunes back into the narrative, as when Pushkin, having mourned the absence of ballerinas he has known in the past, whisks his hero into the theatre of today:
Or am I now estranged from pleasure,
Or as Der Freisch&#252;tz might be played
Or, as Pushkin puts it, that ‘slough/Where, friends, we bathe together now’ (Chapter VI, stanza 46). I have already referred to Dostoyevsky’s praise for Tatiana as the epitome of Russian womanhood.
Or at the bath with new snow falling
Or at the very least for fame;
Or Baratynsky lent his lyre,
Or be judiciously abusing,
Or cards or verse were there at all.
Or cautious Ilya’s to debate.
Or check expenses, if inclined,
Or, cheerless, when the leaves of autumn
Or cross that few will gladly bear).
Ordered a table laid for two.
Or did she only briefly rue?
Or does he still play the eccentric?
Or draws a dove atop a lyre
Or else, fatigued by joy’s profusion,
Or else some lengthy, crazy tale
Or else some other jeu d’esprit
Or else… you’ll need God’s intervention!
Or even my own Demon. Thus,
Or, failing this, made him a poet –
Or find a more propitious clime?
Or, following a boring dinner,
Or frightful dream that makes no sense
Or (gentler) like a butterfly
Or guild of which I’ll speak no wrong,
Or has that versifier’s guile
Or (here I am no longer jesting),
Or if a falling star should fly
Or if, in fiery pique, not thinking,
Or, if not, a perfidious tempter?
Originated, reader, too
Originated, reader, too
Or imitative artifice,
Or interrupt this heavy trance
Or in the garden, arm in arm,
Or kiss the border of her dress.
Or letters from a fledgling give.
Or light relief from labour’s yoke,
Or like the spurt and golden spray
Or maids’ rooms! We must all confess:
Or maybe a satanic monster
Or mother; and herself a child,
Or motley liveries, like soldiers,
Or, on the Lethe, lulled to slumber,
Or plays with her like a coquette,
Or publisher or such-like breeder
Or question mark, as they occurred.
Or repartee worth not a jot,
Or see a swift hare cross her track,
Or seminarist with a greeting
Or shadow fixed to him for life.
Or simply as a decent fellow,
Or something new, but similar?
Or suddenly turn crimson, white…
Or the mistakes I’ve made in grammar –
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Or, to annihilate a rival,
Or touch a bosom full of languor;
O rus!
O Rus’!
Or was it that he could foretell
Or we, in troubled contemplation
Or where your lustre’s not forgotten
Or where your lustre’s not forgotten:
Or whether it should miss – all’s well:
Or whether it should miss – all’s well:
Or whisper, seeing Olga near,
Or will my mournful gaze in vain
Others of piles or Aphrodite;
Others the selfsame journey take.
Other Writings on Pushkin
19. Oton: Russian version of Automne or Autonne, the name of a well-known French restaurateur in Odessa.
Our bridges, now forgotten, rot,
Our dormant hero has not started,
‘Our dreams and years we can’t recover,
Our first success encouraged us,
Our freshest dreams, imaginations
Our friend respected Tanya’s plight
Our friend Tumansky has depicted
Our Grandison, do you remember?’
Our hero’s recent domicile,
Our idol, honour’s spring, which, wound,
‘Our neighbour is a boor, as mad as
Our neighbour… Tell him not to chat
Our Paris of the towns about,
Our Petushkov seeks Olga out,
Our plans until a future date.
Our Russian speech, to no avail,
Our secret sorrow’s consolation…
Ourselves the ones, all others nought.
Our stomach is our faultless timer;
13. Our Tsar said… Alexander’s menial: Alexander attended four congresses aimed at crushing revolution in Europe: in Aachen (1818), Troppau (1820), Laibakh (1821) and Verona (1822). At Laibach the Neapolitan revolution was the main concern, while the Verona congress planned the intervention in Spain. ‘Alexander’s menial is Count Arakcheev, the Tsar’s most powerful adviser. See note i to ‘Fragments of Onegin’s Journey.
Our Tsar said in the congress hall,
Our Tsar was dozing…
Our youth as something to betray,
Out back to more familiar parts.
Out boredom in a country setting,
Out in the backwoods? Walking? Try.
Out in the country, on her own,
Out in the open, undeflected,
Out of a novel, just the manner.’
Out of the valley’s brook they border.
Out on the moonlit dark unending,
Outraged by this behaviour, they
Over a friendly bowl of wine,
Over a Russian vodka, wine,
Over a spouse who keeps her guessing
Over that humble urn beneath.
Over the city’s pavements racing
Over the hills and fields below;
13. Ovid: Roman poet (43 BC-16 AD), author of Metamorphoses and The Art of Love, with whom Pushkin felt a kinship during his exile. Ovid died in exile on the Black Sea.
O you, our stupid Russian folk,
O you, whose memory never fades
30. Ozerov: Vladislav Ozerov (1769–1816), author of five tragedies in the French style, including Fingal (note 27 above), considered ‘very mediocre’ by Pushkin, who put his success down to the acting of Yekaterina Semyonova, whom he regarded highly.
21. Pachette: A Frenchified (and comic) version of the purely Russian Pasha.
Page after page kept turning faster,
P. A. Katenin (whom a fine poetic talent does not prevent from being also a subtle critic) remarked to us that this deletion, while perhaps advantageous for the reader, spoils the plan of the entire work, since, as a result, the transition from Tatiana the provincial miss to Tatiana the grande dame becomes too unexpected and unexplained – an observation revealing the experienced artist. The author himself felt the justice of this, but decided to leave out the chapter for reasons important to him and not to the public. Some fragments have been published; we give them here with several adjoining stanzas.
Pale copy of a vivid picture,
26. Palm Week cherub: Paper figures of cherubs (glued to gingerbread, etc.) sold at the annual fair during Palm Week, the week preceding Easter.
Pans, jars of jam, and chairs and chests
43. pantalons, frac and gilet: These were relatively new items of clothing at the beginning of the nineteenth century as yet without Russian names.
Partaking sorrow and affliction,
Parterre and stalls – all seethe and roar;
Particularly, you’ll agree,
Partings, and tears as love recovers;
Passed on to him a note from Lensky.
Past borders, little bridges, lawn,
Past monasteries, gardens, sleighs,
Past sentries, peasant women dashes,
Past street lamps, shops and errand boys,
Past the hall porter like a dart
Past whole-glass windows shadows flit
Peace unto you, alarms of yore!
Pearls imported by the Indian,
Peers through a chink… the scene’s unsightly,
Pelt him with our cherries, dears,
12. penates: (Latin) guardian deities of the household.
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017, India
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
PENGUIN BOOKS
PENGUIN CLASSICS
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)
Pensive again, again dejected,
Pensive, again to boredom banished,
People are friends from idleness.
Perceive in home life but a show
39. Perfumes: A fashionable novelty at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Perfumes in crystal vials to pamper
Perhaps a glow of old emotion
Perhaps a long time smouldering,
Perhaps a special niche created
Perhaps by heavenly decree
Perhaps he was for good intended
Perhaps his martyred shade in flight
Perhaps in thought we may recover,
Perhaps my feelings are misguided,
Perhaps (my head already aches)
Perhaps some future ignoramus
(Perhaps there’s not so great a difference)
Perhaps you’ve seen by the Neva
Perplexed, not knowing what to think,
25. Pestel’: Pushkin met Pestel’ in Kishinev, remarking that he was one of the most original minds he knew.
62. Petrarch: Francesco Petrarca (1304–74), Italian poet.
Petrarch
15. Petriads: Pushkin gives this ironic, high-sounding name to the various mediocre poems on Peter the Great current at the time.
11. Petrovsky Castle: Built in 1776, then rebuilt in 1840, the castle was roughly two miles from Moscow. Napoleon stopped here on his way to Moscow from St Petersburg. When the fire broke out in Moscow, he took up residence in the castle. The Larins followed the same route in their journey to Moscow, passing Petrovsky Castle on their left.
Petrovsky Castle stands. Dark pride
9. philosophic measurement: The Russian has philosophic tables’, which is perhaps an ironic reference to Charles Dupin’s statistical tables’ showing the economic growth of European states including Russia in his book Forces productives et commerciales de la France (Paris, 1827), which was popular in Russia.
22. pie: The pie or pirog was either a meat or cabbage pie and traditional for a nameday feast.
Pined for his native Italy.
Pink as a Palm Week cherub, shone,
Pipes from Tsargrad, inlaid with amber,
Pique? Vanity? Or, once again,
Pity, I’m too infirm to go,
Plaiting his wretched shoes of yore.
9. planting cabbages, like Horace: Planting cabbages’ is taken from the French planter des (ses) choux, meaning ‘to cultivate a rural life’, which Horace lauded on his withdrawal from Rome to a country estate given to him by Gaius Cilnius Maecenas, adviser to the emperor Augustus.
Plants its red feet upon the ice,
Pleasant to watch the fellow hasten
‘Please, can I see the house?’ asked Tanya.
Please favour the felicities,
Please send your grandson on his way.’
‘Please tell me which one was Tatiana.’
Ploughing up fluffy snow in furrows;
Poetic fire, perceptive wit,
1. poetry of grammar: See Roman Jakobson, Verbal Art, Verbal Sign, Verbal Time (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1985), pp. 37–47.
Poets, I’ll note, in this connection
Polite, affectionate betrayal;
Polite and cold and to the matter
1828Poltava (narrative poem on Peter the Great and Mazeppa). Four-month visit to Transcaucasia. Witnessed Russian army in action against the Turks.
26. Pomeranian dog: The custom of keeping house dogs went back to the second half of the eighteenth century.
Poor Lensky can’t believe his eyes.
Poor Tanya in the new princess!
‘Poor Yorick,’ he declared, dejected,
Portending losses and mischance;
Portraits of Tsars upon the walls
Possessed him bit by bit; not tempted,
Possessed no doll nor made pretence
Possesses half the world much longer,
Post-chaises would have proved too dear,
Pouncing upon a moment’s weakness,
Poured out by Olga’s hand, the steady,
‘Pour me just half a glass or under…
Pours healing streams from its recesses;
14. Pradt and Scott: Dominique de Pradt (1759–1837), French political writer and priest to Napoleon; later a liberal under the Restoration. Sir Walter Scott (1771–1832), Scottish poet and father of the historical novel, who influenced Pushkin in the writing of his own historical novel The Captain’s Daughter (1836). Pushkin read Scott in French translations.
Praise be to you, O nine Camenae, etc.
Pranks, jokes enjoyed, when first they met.
Praskov’ya she’d have called Polina
Precisely so, eight years he killed,
7. precision and brevity… vanished youth: A. S. Pushkin o Literature (Moscow: GIKhL, 1962), p. 23.
Precursor of the labouring day,
Predicted that this noble folk
Prepared to clap an entrechat,
Prepared to yield again to bondage,
Prepares for her an elegy.
Prescribe a spa without delay.
Presentiments constrained her breast.
Present me.’ ‘But you’re joking.’ ‘Promise.’
3.Priam: Last king of Troy, a venerable and kind ruler.
Prince Shakhovskoy delivered his
‘Princesse, mon ange!’ ‘Pachette!’ ‘Dear cousin
Prince Vyazemsky
Proclaiming something to be guessed,
Projecting rainbows on the snow;
24. Prolasov: Prolasov or Prolazov is derived from prolaz’ or pro-laza’, meaning climber’ or sycophant’. He is also a ridiculous figure in eighteenth-century Russian comedies and popular prints.
Pronounced the neighbour. Dead! Onegin,
1830 Proposed to Natalya Goncharova (1812–63). In September – November stranded by cholera epidemic at new estate of Boldino: first and most productive ‘Boldino autumn’ (Onegin; lyrics; Little Tragedies; Tales of Belkin; The Little House in Kolomna).
Protects her secret silently,
Provincial and a touch affected,
P&#233;tri de vanit&#233; il avait encore plus de cette esp&#233;ce d’orgueil qui fait avouer avec la me&#710;me indiff&#233;rence les bonnes commeles mauvaises actions, suite d’un sentiment de sup&#233;riorit&#233;, peut-e&#710;tre imaginaire.
Published by the Penguin Group
Pulled from her charming little foot;
Pure love directed to the good,
Pursued her like the very devil!
Pursuing his ideal, the lame
Pushkin added a series of notes to his edition of Eugene Onegin. I have referred to several of these in the Notes below, but have not translated them as a whole because they include long quotations, often from secondary poets, which themselves would require further annotation, and would, I think, interest only a tiny minority of readers.
Pushkin belongs to a European shift from poetry to prose that Edmund Wilson characterizes in his excellent essay ‘In Honour of Pushkin’ (1937):
Pushkin describes, as if from a manual, the loading of pistols:
Pushkin is referring here to elegiac poetry, including his own, which prevailed in his day. Onegin is, of course, full of ‘memories of vanished youth’, largely in the digressions. An ironic seesaw turns between ‘remembrance of things past’ and the narrative demands of the present. Recidivist memories are quenched by a brisk couplet, allowing the story to continue, as in the ‘little feet’ digression from Chapter I:
Pushkin prefaced his first chapter, which he published on its own in 1825, with ‘A Conversation Between a Bookseller and a Poet’, in which the poet argues the rights of poetry against the requirements of the market. After a flood of Romantic protestation the poet suddenly accepts the bookseller’s case, abandons his verse and negotiates the sale of his manuscript in three short sentences of prose: ‘You’re perfectly right. Here’s my manuscript. Let’s come to terms.’
Pushkin spent the first three years of his exile (1820–23) in what he called the ‘accursed town’ of Kishinev, capital of Bessarabia, serving in the office of General Inzov, Administrator for New Colonies in the South. By 1823, when the Decembrist movement was gathering steam, Pushkin had disavowed his earlier idealism. In ‘The Sower of Freedom in the Desert’, a poem written in Odessa, he scorns himself for philanthropy and the people for passivity. Indirectly, the poem targets the Carbonari and their followers in Western Europe (1820–23), crushed by the Holy Alliance. Pushkin writes to a friend that he is parodying the parable from the Matthew and Luke gospels that tells of Christ going out to sow. In Pushkin’s incarnation the saviour is ‘a moderate democrat’ who sows in vain. The Decembrists were, like the Carbonari, largely a military organization, operating through secret societies and equally disconnected from the people they wished to liberate. Pushkin’s sympathies for the Greek insurgents, whom he met in Kishinev and Odessa, likewise vanished. Could these dregs, he asked, be the descendants of Themistocles and Pericles?
Pushkin’s ‘stills’ initiate the lines, which I was unable to follow. Only Nabokov, in his literal translation, reproduces Pushkin’s syntax exactly, which is a useful exercise for showing how the poetry depends on the deployment of grammar, but makes no pretence to be poetic. Repetition and contrast of primary words form an armature for the Onegin stanza. But such words or particles are usually more open-throated than their English equivalents. The Russian conjunctions ‘i’ and ‘a’, for example, meaning ‘and’ and ‘but’, can be repeated melodically, whereas the repetition of their equivalents in translation will be rebarbative. The same holds for the interrogatives ‘when’, ‘what’, ‘which’, all ending in consonants, where their Russian equivalents terminate in vowels: ‘kogda’, ‘shto’, ‘kakoi/kotory’ and can take any number of repetitions. For this reason the structure of the Onegin stanza can easily fall apart in translation.
Pushkin was still in exile at the time. During the previous years he had met the conspirators, but was not admitted to their ranks because of his volatility and indiscretion. However, when the new Tsar called him to Moscow and asked him what he would have done had he been present at the attempted revolt, Pushkin replied that he would have stood with his friends on the Senate Square in St Petersburg, the chosen place of the insurrection. Nicholas played a cat-and-mouse game with him, revoking his exile and promising to be his personal protector and censor. In fact, the task fell to the chief of the secret police. Pushkin married the beautiful Natalia Goncharova in 1831, who had no interest in his work and was happy only at court functions, which Pushkin hated, particularly after having been assigned a demeaning rank by the Tsar out of keeping with his age. Nor was he, either as a small landowner or a professional writer, able to pay for his wife’s expensive tastes.
19. Pustyakov: Most of the names in this stanza are farcical, largely deriving from the comedies of Fonvizin (see note 28 to Chapter I). Pustyakov means Trifle, Gvozdin Basher, Skotinin Brute, Petush-kov Rooster or Cockahoop. Buyanov (Rowdy) is the hero of a skittish poem The Dangerous Neighbour by Pushkin’s uncle Vasily Pushkin (1770–1830). This allows his nephew to introduce Buyanov here as his cousin.
Put forward his decisive measures,
Put them away, undressed, reflected
8. Pylades, Orestes: In Greek mythology, Orestes, accompanied by his friend Pylades, sails to Tauris to seek absolution from matricide. The rule of the small kingdom requires all strangers to be sacrificed to Diana, the local deity. Each of the two friends wants to die in the place of the other.
3. Qu’&#233;crirez-vous… Annette: ‘What will you write on these tablets?’… Ever yours, Annette.’
Qu’&#233;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?
Quick, to the fields, the land invites
Quite crazy over Richardson.
Quite different, unrelenting pressures,
Races; the sheep of Kalmuks graze
Raised by degrees his pistol first.
Ravishing, gay, mercurial,
Reaches his chamber in a flash,
Reaches unseen a grim amount.
Reader, I shall, if you’ll allow,
Readies its sails for every sphere;
Read, read, not even one was helpful:
Recalled his Lithuania.
Recalled the girl that he had met.
Recalling former years’ romances,
Recalling love that time enhances,
Recalling me, though long unseen.
Recall me, like a friend that’s found.
Recited in a reverie
Reclusive, idle and dejected,
Recovered from oblivion.
Redeemed it from disintegration,
Reflecting thus, a youthful scapegrace,
Refrains from frosty pleasantries;
Refusal was a consolation,
Regarding haymaking, the wine,
Regarding life as mere decorum,
Regretting what is past, what’s gone:
5. Regulus: Roman general Marcus Atilius Regulus (d. c.250 BC), captured by the Carthaginians and sent to Rome with harsh terms of peace. Once there, he advised the Senate to continue the war and returned to Carthage, as he had promised, to face execution.
Rehearses for the protocol
Reigned over us those years ago.
Rejoicing in anticipation,
Relatives from a far location
Relieves the heart of all its troubles,
Religiously, I treasure it,
Remaining with him, and the joys
Remember in The Other Version
Remembrance of another time,
Repeating things in other ways,
Replaced our rhymesters’ gloomy style?’
Reported uncle gravely ill
Reports of infidelity,
Resigned, but not without a tear,
Resolve my doubts, my wavering,
Resoundingly on ramrods flicked,
Resoundingly on ramrods flicked,
Resounding swarm of comedies;
Resounds along the merry pavement,
Respected husbands! May I offer
Resplendence of the rosy snows,
Resplendent carpet softly bound.
Respond with answers, smart or dumb,
Restored the sufferer to calm,
Rests like a traveller drunk at nightfall
Returned to him in his decline,
Returning home, the two are flying
Returning round the kitchen garden,
Returns again now, reappears
Reveals no petty affectation
Reviling masters with their curses;
Reviling masters with their curses;
‘Reviling Moscow! This is what
Revive it with a jealous fire;
Revive their deafening conversations.
Rewarded with caressing eyes
Richards, D. J. and Cockerell, C. R. S., Russian Views of Pushkin (Oxford: Willem A. Meeuws, 1976)
5. Richardson: Samuel Richardson (1689–1761), English novelist, author of Pamela or Virtue Rewarded (1740), Clarissa Harlowe (1748) and Sir Charles Grandison (1754).
Ridding himself, on reaching fifty,
Rides headlong, comes upon the stone
Right now I am not up to it.
Rime in the sun when days were freezing,
Ringed round by nymphs, Istomina
Rings out that it is dinner time.
Rings surface in successive order;
Ripening in their renovation –
Rise, ripen, fall, in quick succession,
Rise, ripen, fall, in quick succession,
Rises with clatter; they all rise:
Rocked by the breeze of early morning
16. Romantic: By ‘Romantic’ Pushkin meant something more full-blooded and realistic, as he explains in his preface to his historical drama Boris Godunov. Obscurely’ and limply’ are terms used by Pushkin’s friend the poet Wilhelm K&#252;khelbeker (1797–1846) in his attack on elegiac poetry.
(Romantic is the term we’ve coined,
Roosters in cages, pots and basins,
Rose from her bench in calmer state:
Rossini, Europe’s darling, beckons –
Round her a silken curtain closes,
Round nomad tents; Onegin’s gaze
Roused thoughts in him he’d long interred;
Rousseau (I’ll note with your permission)
40. Rousseau: Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–78), French writer and philosopher. In his note 6 Pushkin quotes at length from the description in Rousseau’s Confessions of Grimm’s toiletry.
Ñïàñèáî, ÷òî ñêà÷àëè êíèãó â áåñïëàòíîé ýëåêòðîííîé áèáëèîòåêå Royallib.com: http://royallib.com
Ñïàñèáî, ÷òî ñêà÷àëè êíèãó â áåñïëàòíîé ýëåêòðîííîé áèáëèîòåêå Royallib.com: http://royallib.com
Ruling the opulent Neva.
Runs through a linden, forest nook.
3. Ruslan and Lyudmila:(1820) A mock-epic and Pushkin’s first major work. Pushkin signals his return to a light-hearted manner after a series of impassioned Romantic poems.
15. Russia again returned… smouldering: The Semyonovsky revolt was quelled, but the Decembrist movement had begun. Pushkin’s image of the ‘spark responds to a line in a poem sent to him from Siberia by the Decembrist Prince Alexander Odoevsky: ‘From a spark a flame will burst’.
Russia again returned to quietness,
Russian, I find, is unbeguiling
Russian she knew, but very badly,
Russia’s Terpsichore again?…
Russia’s Terpsichore again?
Russia…
21. R&#233;veillez-vous, belle endormie: ‘Awake, sleeping beauty.’
R&#233;veillez-vous, belle endormie.
Sad, cold, I still recall their smart,
40. Sadi: Sadi or Saadi (b. between 1203 and 1210, d. 1292) was a Persian poet, born in Shiraz. Pushkin’s quotation from Saadi gave cause to official suspicion that he was referring to the Decembrists.
Sad is the trace of passions dead:
Said the old lady with a wheeze.
Sailed one lone boat with waving oars,
25. Saint-Priest: Count Emmanuil Saint-Priest (1806–28) was a hussar and fashionable cartoonist, son of a French &#233;migr&#233;.
65. Salgir: A river in the Crimea. The captive maids are the harem girls of Pushkin’s narrative poem The Fountain of Bakhchisaray (1824). The ‘maid of the mountain’ is the Circassian heroine of his poem The Captive of the Caucasus (1822). In Chapter VIII of Onegin he reviews his literary heroines up to the point where they transmogrify into Tatiana.
Sandler, S., Distant Pleasures: Alexander Pushkin and the Writing of Exile (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1989)
Sang of the heart that stirs our dreams.
Sang, too, our glorious, ancient themes,
Sat sulking; in his corner he
‘Save us, O Lord, have mercy, pray!
Saving the honour of my land,
Saw neither man nor habitation
Saw nothing through her tears, but she,
Saw Pylades, Orestes strive,
55. Say and Bentham: Jean-Baptiste Say (1767–1832), French publicist and economist, follower of Ricardo and Adam Smith, author of Trait&#233; d’&#233;conomie politique (A Treatise on Political Economy, 1803). Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), liberal English publicist and jurist.
Says nothing, does not see him there.
Say, why for God’s sake did you ever
17. Sbogar: Hero of Charles Nodier’s (1780–1844) Jean Sbogar (1818). Sbogar is the Dalmatian chief of a robber band who redistribute wealth in favour of the common good’.
Scarce breathing and without replying,
Scarce out of swaddling, always mild,
4. Schiller, Goethe: Friedrich Schiller (1759–1805), German poet, philosopher, historian and dramatist. His early plays Die R&#228;uber (The Robbers, 1781) and Kabale und Liebe (Intrigue and Love, 1784) and his idealist poetry fired the Romantics throughout Europe. He later joined Goethe in Weimar to promote a classical aesthetic. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832), German poet, dramatist, novelist and scientist. His masterpiece Faust and his novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (Wilhelm Meister’sApprenticeship, 1795–6) strongly influenced the Romantics in Germany, although he came to see himself (with Schiller) as a defender of classical values. Pushkin’s knowledge of German literature was largely drawn from Mme de Sta&#235;l’s De l’ Allemagne (On Germany, 1813), which put a Romantic gloss on Kant, Schiller and Goethe. His ability to read German was very limited.
Screened by a hill from wind’s intrusion,
Season of blissful walks and wandering,
Season of hopes and tender sorrow,
Season of love, when all’s in bud!
Season of warmth, of flowers and toil,
Secluded in the wood’s domain.
Seclusion, quiet – thus, in fine,
Seclusion, stillness and the night,
Secret excursions in a sleigh;
Secure in my presupposition
Securely screwed-in flint raised high
Sed alia tempora!Audacity
7. Sed alia tempora: Latin: ‘But times are different.’
Seductive notoriety?
(see Chapter One, stanza 60)
Seeing the young moon’s countenance
Seek a known face on dreary stages,
Seem dark to it, funereal?
Seemed almost ready now to die,
Seems insolent and out of place,
Seen as a shameful machination –
Sees off its ancestors with wreaths.
Seethes with its rich emporium:
See the uprising carried through.
Selfsame as ever, new, inventive,
Semi-ethereal and radiant,
20. seminarist… in yellow shawl: In this case a seminarist is a learned woman.
Semyon Petrovich just as mean;
Sensing the corpse, the horses foam,
Sensing the pair, a road horse, nearing,
1826 September Summoned to Moscow by Nicholas I. Freed from exile, with tsar as personal censor; subject thereafter to ‘surveillance, guidance and counselling’ of Count Benkendorf, Head of the Third Section (Secret Police). Resumed life in Moscow and St Petersburg; restlessness, search for stability.
Set off, but just as she was turning
Settles the frozen corpse, escorting
Set to a children’s melody:
Shacks, merchants, peasants selling wares,
Shadow, is leaping through the manor,
32. Shakhovskoy: Prince Alexander Shakhovskoy (1777–1846), theatre director and author of comedies satirizing contemporary writers.
Shaking their heads, the neighbours gather,
Shall I attempt to picture truly
Shall I be here that day…? he said.’
Shall I in silence yawn and cast
Shall recompense your candour by
‘Shall we not start now?’ ‘If you’re willing,’
Sharing my feelings with the fashions,
Sharing the leisure time we spend.
Sharp-peaked, at its eternal station,
She ascertained the perfect measure
She avidly began to read
She braced herself, with trembling hand
She breaks into a coughing fit.
She breathes a sigh and, taking over
She circles slowly with the other,
She coloured with a dreamy vision
She could… good God, what has he heard?
She could not snuggle up to father
She crossed the girl and said a prayer.
She dares not look, strains every limb
She d gallop with me on a horse
She did not read our journals, sadly;
She’d learned to utter through her nose;
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
She does not care or does not see.
She does not hear from our two friends
She does not mark, she does not heed him,
She does not set upon the letter
She does not stare with insolence,
She drinks deception’s honeydew.
She drops her handkerchief, foregoing
She drove out to inspect the farmers,
8. shed tears… buttercups: A way of atoning for sins: the number of teardrops represents the number of sins.
She’d turn quite pale, begin to tremble.
She’d wear tight stays to suit convention,
She entered the deserted pile,
She falls into the snow; and nimbly
She feels herself their heroine,
She feels more strongly passion’s sway,
She feels or the bewilderment,
She finds no comforts anywhere
She flies, flies from the porch outside
She follows passion’s weathervane?
She found the games of catch too vulgar,
She gave a start, said not a word
She gazes – and the heart in her
She goes. He stands in desolation
She grew enamoured of the marvels
She halts there at the very brink.
She hastens out; with melting eyes
She hears, hears not the cavatina,
She is Julie, Delphine, Clarissa;
‘She is no child now, if you please,’
She is unhurried, not loquacious,
She knows you.’ ‘I live near her home.’
She leaned on it and scarce could stand;
She leaned upon it, silent, sad,
She led me in nocturnal gloom
She lets Onegin go on kneeling
She lifts her veil of gauze and reads
She liked the hieratic order
She looked: inside the hall, unheeded,
She looks at him: ‘What is it?’ ‘Oh,
She looks but does not see, detesting
She loved him… or was she deceiving?
Sheltered from storms, he spends his time
She never even moved an eyebrow,
She, not her husband, was the boss.
She now forgot, began to call
She opens gingerly the door…
She owes a curtsey to the bard;
She paid no heed to company
She paid three rubles, one poltina,
She, paler than the moon at morn,
She pauses now as doubts beset her:
She pickled mushrooms, saved and spent,
She pondered – and at once decided
She quietly utters just a word
She raised her tired eyes moonward, dreaming
She reads delicious novels through,
She runs, and he pursues her still,
She said: ‘It’s he! He’s made his call.’
She’s come, herself she scatters, weighting
She scurries round and wants to scream,
She seeks a meaningful solution
She seemed inside her family
7. She shaved the conscripts’ foreheads: Shaving foreheads was the way of marking out recruits for the army, thereby getting rid of unwanted serfs, who were torn away from their families and often had to serve for life.
She shaved the conscripts’ foreheads, went
She should abhor in him for ever
She shows a quiet, simple grace,
She shuns the winter, cannot bear
She sighed after another one
She sits beside the window, sees
She skipped down from the porch as fast
She’s learned already to betray!
‘She’s mine,’ Onegin spoke out grimly,
She’s occupied with other needs.
She, stifling here, in fancy strains
She takes in all. The simple maiden
She trembles, burns and looks behind her,
She turns down everyone. And broods,
She visited the humble tents
She was at last alone and free,
She was disturbed by every portent,
She will not see him, maybe never,
She writes, with Eugene on her mind,
She wrote, with a beguiling finger,
She yields insensibly and limply,
Shines in the sky’s untroubled spaces,
Shines like the regal moon alone
17. Shishkov: Admiral Alexander Shishkov (1754–1841), leader of the Archaist group of writers who contested the inclusion or adaptation of French vocabulary into Russian.
Shishkov forgive, can’t Russify).
Shocks nobody’s propriety.
Should be contempt, of course, but then
Should be so called, I’ve no idea).
Shoulders and nose above them all,
Should she continue, does she dare?
Should they not spurn the duel’s seduction?…
Should they not stop and laugh instead
Shouting and tinkling glass astound her
Showed us a hero dedicated
Shows save the trembling moon, downcast…
Shutters unlock, in columns high
Shy as a doe, in forest hidden,
Shy maiden’s album with her blood,
Sighs most your lyre? To which of these
Simple and poor, by love distraught,
Since at your christening I dried you,’
Since Gallicisms are as tempting
Since he, not always, it was plain,
Since he would yawn, indifferent to
Since it’s among them I belong.
Since morning dressed, pale as a spectre,
Since my poor style, such as it is,
Sings (as the spring rain dots the grass)
Sings to the spring; the dog rose flowers,
sir”.’ All agreed this was de trop.
Sit down – how wonderful, a scene
Sit on her own throughout the day.
Sits at the window… constantly.
Sits calmly and at liberty.
Sits down to whist; concludes the game:
Sits pale and unadorned, forlorn,
Sitting with lowered head and still,
Sketches of female heads or feet
Slave of the Lord and Brigadier
Sleep hovers still before his eyes.
Sleep shuns her bed, will not return;
Slips and falls over in mid-motion;
Slips to expose her shoulder’s charm…
Slowing the soul’s impetuous pace.
Slow Lethe will engulf for ever
Slumber and of the moon, when she
Small hamlets could be glimpsed around,
Smile, virginal repose and peace –
Smoking a pipe near incandescent,
Snatching clandestine assignations…
Sniffing the snow and hesitating,
Snorts – and the traveller goes tearing
Snowdrifts rear up before the maid,
Snow only fell in January, on
So a poor butterfly will flutter
So a poor butterfly will flutter
So a small winter hare will shudder
So a small winter hare will shudder
So bees from honied hives will scatter
Society flattered him with praise:
So circumspect, precise and precious,
So different as these men were.
So, don’t be angry with me, listen:
Softly, and falls, as, misty-eyed,
So full of pious sentiment,
So inaccessible to men,
So let us go, do me the favour!’
Solicits the cotillion next.
So like your waist, Zizi, so small,
So long. You’ll stay? Well, stop this fussing,
So many echoes in that word!
So many vacant places there.’
Some are no more now, some are distant,
Some army poet here has scribbled
Some brilliant lady comes to me,
Some few things in some random way;
Some four years now, can hardly function.
Some, going further still, asserted
Some individuals he spared,
Some minutes they together sit.
Some of the stanzas were omitted with an eye to censorship, especially Onegin’s visit to the notorious military settlements set up by Count Arakcheev (1769–1854), Alexander I’s military adviser. These were harsh detention centres to which peasants were conscripted. Katenin (see below) wrote to Annenkov, Pushkin’s first biographer, on 24 April 1853, that the poet had decided to sacrifice the entire chapter because of the violence of his comments. In his Foreword Pushkin is silent about his intentions and simply acknowledges Katenin’s very different criticism of the omission there. Since Novgorod was one of the locations of these settlements, it has been suggested that Onegin’s visit to them coincides with his stay in the town. In other words, the Fragments may have begun with such a visit. It is possible that Onegin also saw the settlements outside Odessa, the town that takes up most of the Journey. Pavel Ivanovich Pestel’ (1793–1826), one of the leaders of the Decembrists in the South, wanted to foment a revolt in these camps.
Some other spring of older days
Some reconstruction must be wrought…
Sometimes, all company forsaking,
Sometimes she’ll bow out of politeness,
Sometimes she simply takes no notice.
Sometimes, when still in bed he drowses,
Some waywardness, some casual penchant…
Some would have women reading Russian,
So miserable and pathetic,’
26. Song of the Girls: Invented by Pushkin, but adapted from folk songs he heard on his family estate at Mikhailovskoye. This is a wedding song where the bridegroom is symbolized by cherries and the bride by berries. It has the double effect of keeping the girls from eating the fruit and adding to Tatiana’s situation.
Song of the Girls
Songs we cherish secretly,
Soon fire a bullet at my pal.
Soon Lensky’s at the sisters’ dwelling.
Soon Olya’s voice no more resounded
Soon was the youthful bride forsaking
So, our light-headed tribe, now roaming,
So rend and tear apart my soul.
So resolutely to her role,
So take it, reader, quickly, please!).
So that throughout the year remaining
So, too, the wary veteran,
So travel, too fed his dejection.
1820–24 ‘Southern exile’ (via Caucasus and Crimea to Kishinev and, from July 1823, Odessa). ‘Byronic’ narrative poems, including The Captive of the Caucasus and The Fountain at Bakhchisaray. Began Eugene Onegin (1823). Recognition as leading poet of his generation.
So will a seed that’s fallen in
19. Spain’s ambassador: An anachronism. There was no Spanish ambassador in St Petersburg in 1824, when Chapter VIII takes place. A new ambassador appeared in 1825, when Russia resumed diplomatic relations with Spain, broken off during the Spanish revolution. This and similar anachronisms in the last two chapters suggest that Pushkin wanted to set a post-Decembrist background to his story.
Speaks of Onegin far away.
Spent winter only recently
Spins by the crackling splintwood light,
Spoiled and alive to every ruse,
Spoiled by the life he had been granted,
Spot one lone thought, even by chance;
Spreads out a puffy shroud to cover
Spring calls you to the country soil,
Squeezes her hand – her rosy flush
Stands in this fashionable cell.
Stands silently, with disaffection?
Stands still; one foot supporting her,
Stands up; and all the guests before him
Stands with becoming modesty
STANLEY MITCHELL was born in 1932 in London. He read Modern Languages (French, German and Russian) at Oxford. He taught at various universities – Birmingham, Essex, Sussex, San Diego California, McGill Montreal, Dar es Salaam Tanzania, Derby, University College London and Camberwell School of Art. Subjects included Russian literature and art, comparative literature, art history and cultural studies. He retired from Derby as Emeritus Professor of Aesthetics and was made an Honorary Senior Research Fellow in the Art History Department of UCL. He has translated Georg Luk&#225;cs and Walter Benjamin, written a variety of articles and reviews, and given numerous lectures and talks.
STANLEY MITCHELL
Stanley Mitchell
Stanza 46, lines 13–14:
10. 36: Stanza 36 was published only in the separate edition of Chapters IV and V.
(Stanza 43)
(Stanza 46)
(Stanza 34)
(Stanza 40)
(Stanza 15)
Stanza 47
Started in 1823 in Kishinev, Onegin was completed eight years later in the village of Tsarskoye Selo, which housed both the imperial summer palace and Pushkin’s lyc&#233;e. Pushkin finished Chapter I in 1824 in Odessa on the Black Sea, to which he was transferred after Kishinev, and published it separately in 1825. Chapter II he wrote in the same year in Odessa together with part of Chapter III, which he completed in the following year, 1825, on the family estate at Mikhailovskoye in north-west Russia and his last place of exile. Here, from 1825 to 1827, he wrote Chapters IV to part of VII, which he finished in St Petersburg in 1828. Chapter VIII he wrote in Boldino, his father’s estate in the province of Nizhny Novgorod, south-west of Moscow, in 1830, revising it and adding Onegin’s letter in Tsarskoye Selo in 1831. By then he was thirty-two.
Starts beating fast and oftener.
Stayed rooted to the spot, and feared.
Stays, album, the Princess Alina,
1. ‘Steeped in vanity, he had even more the kind of pride that will accept good and bad actions with the same indifference – the result of a feeling of superiority, perhaps imaginary. (From a private letter.)’ There is no known source for this quotation.
Stifles a sigh before she starts
Still, after many years, in place.
Still cupids, devils, snakes keep leaping
Still cupids, devils, snakes keep leaping
Still forever fare thee well.
Still hesitant in forming judgements,
Still holding back the newly wed,
Still hopes and keeps to his agenda.
Still inside, outside, burning bright,
Still inside, outside, burning bright,
Still more does poor Tatiana burn;
Still more the Tsar went revelling,
Still Pelageya Nikolavna
Still pleasanter with quiet persistence
Still seething, Lensky sought to shun
Still sleeps a sleep that nought can mar.
Still telling lies Lyubov Petrovna,
Still to this day, without intrusion,
19. St Khariton: A Muscovite identified his address by its proximity to this or that church. The saint in question was a martyr in the Orient, under Diocletian, in about AD 303. Pushkin had spent several years in this residential quarter as a child. The parish was in east Moscow, which explains why the Larins, who entered Moscow by the western gate, had to traverse the entire city.
Straightening out his wig, inquired
Straight from the cellars to our board,
Straight ones and curved, and tiny tweezers,
23. Strasbourg pie, that keeps for ever: Made from goose liver and imported in tins, therefore ‘kept for ever’. Tinned food was invented during the Napoleonic wars.
Streams silver; and a shepherd’s horn
13. street lamps: The streets were illumined by oil-lit lamps attached to striped pillars. These were lit at dusk and extinguished in the morning by a special staff. They gave out a dullish light.
Stretched out a paw, sharp claws protruding;
22. St Simeon’s: St Simeon’s was in the same parish as St Khariton. St Simeon Stylites the Elder (390?-459) was a Syrian hermit who spent thirty-seven years on a pillar.
Studies of Pushkin with discussion of Eugene Onegin
Studies of Russian literature with discussion of Eugene Onegin
Stupidity wins our applause?
Subduing innocence and meekness
Such as a girl of mere thirteen
Such in the country was the custom;
Such madrigals to me back then:
Such musings soon became a habit
Such words so carelessly delighting,
Sufficient that upon a field
Sunk a long time in reverie,
Sure to attract the mocking gaze
Surges of virgin reverie,
Surrendered now with all his soul.
Surrendered, the fair summer days
Surrendered to a Gallic squad,
Surround the women and the dames.
Surveillances by mothers, aunts
Surveyed the millstone critically.
Surveying her from top to toe;
Surveys the fields, and speaks in mourning
Suspecting wonders of mankind.
4. Svetlana: Heroine of Vasily Zhukovsky’s ballad of the same name (1812). Zhukovsky (1783–1852) was Russia’s outstanding Romantic poet, a friend and protector of Pushkin and a mentor of Nicholas I’s son and heir. Svetlana was a free adaptation of Gottfried August B&#252;rger’s (1747–94) ballad Lenore (1773).
Sweet comfort and a free existence:
Sweeten my mute trajectory
Sweet talk of friends. So many days
Swore he would madden Lensky and
Table, divan of down, two cupboards,
Takes in the far Caucasian masses.
Takes on a brighter coloration,
Takes up his pen and writes his own –
Taking her to his country seat,
Talking with Spain’s ambassador?’
19. Talon’s: A restaurant on the Nevsky Prospekt owned by a Frenchman until 1825.
‘Tanya, my dear! We never even
Tanya surrenders to his glamour…
‘Tanya, what things? Once I was able
Tatiana and Anisya parted,
Tatiana cannot help but linger,
Tatiana cast a downward look,
Tatiana catches with surprise
Tatiana comes, and she ignores him,
Tatiana, coming to, looks round her:
Tatiana cried, he roared at her,
Tatiana, dear Tatiana, vanquished!
Tatiana does not go to bed
Tatiana dreads this winter’s quest.
Tatiana, from her window seeking,
Tatiana hears with scant attention
Tatiana held to the convictions
Tatiana hides – the capers irk her –
Tatiana! Is it written to?
Tatiana, knowing not the reason,
Tatiana listened with vexation
Tatiana long as in a vision
Tatiana loves in earnest, she
Tatiana met him, in despair.
Tatiana murmured at the tide,
Tatiana quietly pined and suffered;
Tatiana saw with trepidation
Tatiana seeks the garden bowers
Tatiana seeks to be convivial,
Tatiana’s graces, pale with care,
Tatiana’s husband he encountered.
Tatiana sighed and, though still yearning,
Tatiana’s Letter to Onegin
Tatiana’s lying in despair.
Tatiana’s nameday, Saturday.
Tatiana, sprightly Olga, tell?’
Tatiana’s scarce alive; Triquet,
Tatiana’s touched by the good-hearted
Tatiana, terror-stricken, waking,
Tatiana, though, preferred to linger
Tatiana to her soul is riven
Tatiana trembled, flushed, uneasy.
Tatiana waits for a reply.
Tatiana walks, walks on and on,
Tatiana, wholly without bearings,
Tatiana wished the pair God speed.
10. Tauris: The Crimea, where Pushkin spent three weeks during his first year of exile.
Tell me the feelings that would rule
Tells from the ensigns how he’s faring,
Tells you to quell your raging blood,
Tender and bold, while off and on
22. tender Parny’s: Evariste D&#233;sir&#233; Desforges, Chevalier de Parny (1753–1814) French poet. He used the word tendre profusely in his elegies.
20. ten strikes: Ten o’clock. Onegin visits at the earliest opportunity. Normally, guests would arrive at a soir&#233;e much later.
4. Terek: Caucasian river.
34. Terpsichore: Ancient Greek goddess of dance.
Tertz, Abram (A. Sinyavsky), Strolls with Pushkin (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1993)
33. Thalia: The Greek Muse of comedy. Given the banning of Griboyedov’s Woe from Wit and the general stagnation of comic drama in the mid-1820s, Pushkin took a sceptical view of Russian comedy, too.
Than Bogdanovich’s in verse.
Than hunted doe, stays looking down
Thank God, then, it’s no tribulation
Thank God, to shoot himself, but, emptied
Than many, Eugene was inclined
Than on a merry night to hear
Than, running down with expedition,
Than Van Dyck has in his madonnas:
Than when a poor wife wastes her tears
Than when a sapling sheds its leaves,
Than you to cherish at my side.
That agitates her heart abates,
That any zealous rot of mine
That brought us oysters from Tsargrad.
That constitute our country’s roads.
That earned a place in his goodwill:
That even in the names we’re given
That fashion’s parquet cannot muster.
That fate keeps for you in reserve?
That fervent spirit, oddly yearning,
That gave her equanimity:
That grieve for him… but wherefore grieve?
That he is kissing avidly…
That he must take the duelling-case,
That he was able with a smattering
That (hitherto said as a joke)
That I had found my past ideal,
That I have crudely versified
That I shall die here silently.
That I shall see you that same day…
That is, he knew how states subsist,
That I stopped sinning long ago.
That lady in the crimson beret
That language with its ardent flair
That Lensky, Eugene would be vying
That lifts my boat and sets it basking
That little girl… a dream, maybe?
That little girl… the one whom he
That made society appealing;
That monde or husband might suppose
That most revered and blessed wine,
That my free novel would attain.
That nothing can resuscitate.
That nothing else could remedy;
That nothing in her darkened glass
That occupied my anchorites.
That once a slander gets expressed
That once more sets our hearts aquiver
That on their lips a foreign tongue
That on the pale horizon moved,
That oscillates from edge to edge.
That Ovid sang and paid for dear,
That promised them a husband from
That rivalled my embitterment.
That round about is naked steppe;
That sacrifices life to rhyme,
That Satan plays on gentlefolk.
That’s batted one way or another,
That seem somewhat absurd today.
That settles on a flower near by;
That she was safe, walked on ahead,
That she with sad presentiment
That soon he’d be among them, yet she
That’s so. But then there’s whirling fashion
‘That’s very well, but where the deuce is
That swells beneath a Southern sky,
That their immortal family
That there is no absurdity,
That there were some whom fate had chosen,
That they, despite their stern behaviour,
That they must leave, that they must race.
That they permitted to be heard,
That those good folk whom you’ve befriended
That virtuous wives will all be true
That wedding plans had all been made
That would have been a boon, indeed!
That you transpose the foreign diction
The Academic Dictionary.
8. the Aeneid: Epic poem by Roman poet Virgil (70–19 BC).
The ageing lady was delighted
The aim of these military establishments, established by Alexei Arakcheyev in 1817, was to reduce the cost of a standing army during peacetime by dragooning government peasants into labour camps, where they would combine military service with working on the land under punitive discipline. One of these settlements outside Odessa might have attracted the attention of Onegin as it did that of the Decembrist leader, Pavel Pestel, who hoped to break into it at the time of the planned revolt and incite the detainees to mutiny. As it stands, the published Fragment resembles a travelogue punctuated by the hero’s cries of ‘ennui’, as he moves restlessly from one place to another. Critics have noticed a similarity with Byron’s Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, which continued to fascinate Pushkin and which he attempted to translate as late as 1836.
The album of a country miss,
The almanachs, reviews that ever
35. The almanachs… treating me with animus: Almanachs, unlike journals or reviews, appeared irregularly and were more like anthologies. While he was writing Chapter VIII, Pushkin came under attack from the main literary journals, especially The Northern Bee, edited by the police spy Bulgarin.
The anguish of my troubled heart?
The answer to his droll dominion
29. The ‘archive boys’: A designation coined by Pushkin’s friend S. Sobolevsky for a circle of writers inspired by the German philosopher Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (1775–1854) known as the lyubomudry (‘lovers of wisdom’ – a Russified version of philosophy’ or philosopher’). The majority of them served in the archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Despite the satire here, Pushkin was by no means hostile to the group, who included the outstanding men of letters Prince Vladimir Odoyevsky, Stefan Shevyryov and Dmitri Venevitinov.
The archive boys in congregation
The arc of seats for brides-to-be
The ardent players to their thrall,
The argument grows louder quickly,
The army with a march and drum.
The art’s exalted Muses, he
34. the Assembly: The Russian Assembly of Nobility, founded in 1783.
The authors that she loves so seize her,
The autumn weather not yet gone,
21. The badge of which two sisters prated: The badge is a court decoration inscribed with the royal monogram granted by the Tsar to women who became ladies-in-waiting to the Empress. In an unpublished version of this stanza the sisters are referred to as orphans. When their father, General Borozdin, died, leaving them penniless, the Tsar took them under his wing.
The badge of which two sisters prated,
The baker, punctual German, wearing
The bard of Juan and the Giaour
The bear declares: ‘My gaffer’s here:
The bear has gone: beyond the hall
The bear retrieves and carries her;
The beds are made. The guests are all
The bee flies from its waxen comb,
The beetle whirrs. The waters flow.
The beetle whirrs. The waters flow.
The blood within my withered heart,
The blow’s too much for Lensky; cursing
The books then called for her attention.
The book that claimed her rapt attention
The boring feasts and latest trends.
The bouquet of French cookery,
The box where, in her beauty shining,
The breath of the indulgent night!
The breeder from the steppe-land speeds
The bride I could not love enough;
The British Muse’s tales intrude on
12. The British Muse’s tales: Romanticism was in Russia largely taken to be an English trend in European literature.
The bubbling brook’s tranquillity,
The captive maids of Salgir’s waters.
The careless fruit of leisure times,
The care with which the women dress;
The carpet-covered bed, the books,
The chairs are pushed back in a clatter,
The characters that she most prizes:
The chaste, the cold, the wintry kind,
The child had charm, though boisterous.
The child of luxury and pastime
The children ran off speedily
The children’s chosen assignations
The child with her obedient doll
The chilling train of yawns in store
The chill of tranquil pride that awed her,
The choral dances, guessing songs.
The church bells’ early roundelay,
18. The Cleopatra of Neva: Probably Countess Yelena Zavadovsky, whose cold, queenly beauty was the talk of society.
The Cleopatra of Neva,
The cloistered molluscs, live and well,
The coaches and the people flounder,
The coach has been inspected, mended,
The cock has for the first time clicked.
The cock has for the first time clicked.
The cock salutes the morning star,
The codes of rank that cramp the soul!
The colonel has arranged it all,
The cooks prepare a lunch for all,
16. the Corsair: Hero of Byron’s poem of the same name.
The country has its rules regarding
The country place where Eugene suffered
The country’s natural divide,
The couples flick across the floor.
The critic John Bayley, who introduced Johnston’s translation, had already reinforced this eighteenth-century image of Pushkin in 1971 in his Pushkin: A Comparative Commentary,where, in order to familiarize anglophone readers with the Russian poet, he had aligned him with Jane Austen and Laurence Sterne, pointing out perceptively that all three authors shared a pre-modern, pre-professional, pre-realist mode of writing. But whether their work relies purely on convention and artifice, as he argues, is another matter. Pushkin adored Sterne, whom he read in French, and Onegin’s devious manner of storytelling may remind us of him. But Bayley’s comparison is really more formalist than historical, since he finds a similar use of convention and artifice in a long range of writers from Chaucer to Joyce and owes much of his interpretation to the Russian Formalist Viktor Shklovsky, who, in 1923, described the novel as a Sternean game with the plot. Today, in Western academic circles, this tradition, now more complex and innovative, has become the prevailing wisdom. Avant garde critics in Russia have now gone further, crowning Pushkin as the first Russian postmodernist.
The crown sweet love gave him to carry,
The crush, the glitter and the gladness,
The cry resounds: ‘Away, away’;
The crystal pattern of my soul,
The cry they hear is the Princess’s.
The cue’s forgotten in the shade,
The cunning captive day or night
The cunning spouse, a Faublas pupil,
The curtains of his bed he’s parted;
The customs of antiquity;
The dales dry out and colour over.
The damp cork pops, the bottle’s emptied,
The darkness thinning by degrees,
The day flowed by, there came no letter
The days my fate has counted off.
The day was getting shorter now,
The dazzling light of hope imbues you:
The dead man buried, feasting followed,
The desk, the lamp there, now extinguished,
The desolate bard, as in the past
The digressions are slower in pace than the narrative, more insistent, impassioned, full of questions. The language is more archaic, more ‘poetical’. Pushkin’s narrative in general is precise, brief and straightforward. Rarely is a noun accompanied by more than one adjective. But Pushkin’s recourse to the past is more than a question of ‘vanished memories’. It is also an attachment to past values, traditions, institutions, sometimes ironically expressed, but not always. In a world dominated by Western fashions Pushkin likes to return to the ‘good, old days’. He is constantly calling his generation ‘light’, that is, without depth, not rooted. The digressions refer either to the past or the future, to ‘vanished memories’ or future hopes. Tatiana and Onegin are likewise immersed in their past, while Lensky thinks only of a happy or heroic future. Nevertheless, the narrative takes place in the present, although told mostly in the pasttense. Here is the real world which Pushkin describes with a mixture of realism and irony – from the benevolent evocations of country customs to the repugnant chatter of the monde. The most Romantic episode in the novel, Tatiana’s dream, is firmly based in folklore. The digressions remain the locus of romanticism, but they are always tempered with irony, as in the examples given above, and they get fewer towards the end of the novel. Romanticism and realism contrast most starkly in the Narrative between Lensky’s elegiac poem written on the eve of the duel and Pushkin’s meticulous account of the duel itself. Where Lensky writes:
The dismal lot that I endure,
The distant reach of the domain
The distant space of heaven’s dome,
The doors fly open, Lensky enters,
The door stirs. Olga flies to her,
The drawing-room receives the crowd,
The dreadful conflagration burst.
The dreadful treasure to its home.
The dread where vice and shame may lurk,
The dream disturbs her. In confusion,
The dreams to which he was addicted,
The dreams with all else unconnected,
The driver hurtles with panache
The droshkies that career away,
The dull life of a bachelor;
The earlier poem, The Fountain of Bakhchisaray, has no relevance to the novel apart from its elegiac epigraph and a recollection of the fountain in Onegin’s Journey. The epigraph reads: ‘Many, like myself used to visit this fountain; but some are no more and the others are wandering in distant parts.’Pushkin took the epigraph from the thirteenth-century Persian poet Sadi via a French translation of Thomas Moore’s Lalla Rookh, where it is included. The second half of the epigraph recurs in the final stanza of Onegin, almost certainly applying, among others, to the fallen and exiled Decembrists, as the authorities were quick to suspect. Indeed, Vyazemsky was rapped over the knuckles by the authorities for quoting these lines in an article. The Fountain recounts a Romantic tale of a Polish princess captured and loved unrequitedly by a Crimean Khan and murdered by his hitherto favourite, Zarema. Putting her to death in turn, the Khan erects a ‘fountain of tears’ in memory of the Polish princess. Pushkin on his visit to the Crimea found the once gorgeous palace of Bakhchisaray deserted and the fountain rusted over. In Onegin’s Journey he imagines it still working.
The early-morning noise is cheering,
The earth be quickened by the spring.
The earth is closed and no more heard?
The earth which by her is caressed,
The epithets attending Tatiana belong, by contrast, to elegiac poetry. She is ‘wayward’, ‘silent’, ‘sad’, ‘shy’, ‘dreamy’, ‘contemplative’, ‘languid’, ‘pale’, ‘strange’ – ‘strange’ not in the manner of Onegin, but as an anomaly in her family, in rural society and later in the monde where she hides her true feelings. In the early chapters she is always to be found at a window, contemplating the moon. Tatiana is transformed when she becomes a princess, but when she tells Onegin that this is only outward show, she speaks as she used to when she first met him. Like Onegin she is characterized by the foreign novels she reads. These, however, are the pre-Romantic or sentimental novels of the eighteenth century rather than the early nineteenth-century Romantic fiction that Onegin enjoys. She identifies with the heroines of Samuel Richardson, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Mme de Sta&#235;l, whose novel Delphine appeared just at the beginning of the new century, in 1802. Although Tatiana is ‘Russian to the core’ (Chapter V, stanza 4), her letter to Onegin is not only a translation of a non-existent French original, but, as Nabokov has shown, French translators have found no difficulty in rendering it back into their own language more or less literally. It echoes not only phrases from Rousseau’s La Nouvelle H&#233;lo&#239;se, one of Tatiana’s favourite novels, but other French sources beyond Tatiana’s ken. The letter can be decoded as a palimpsest of borrowings, while it retains the spontaneous passion that has moved generations of readers in Russia.
The erstwhile comrades slowly, steadily
The evening comes, the game is ended,
The evening samovar now hissed,
The fair sex ceased to be appealing,
The fame of Lovelaces has faded
The family of Kharlikov had
The fervent author in times gone
The final date is almost gone.
The final stage to which we’re led,
The fire is out; ash barely covers
The fires of fishermen; and, dreaming
The fire upon the altar’s gone.
The first housed an expenses manual,
The first snow flickers gaily round,
The flaming lamps that light the night;
The flickering of dress and speech,
The flicker, whirl of dancing feet,
The foes cast off their cloaks, meanwhile
The foggy novel being debated,
The folk whom we do not neglect,
The following selection is confined to books in English and excludes many excellent articles on Eugene Onegin in scholarly journals. (Some of these are indicated in The Companion to Pushkin, see below.) An extensive bibliography of critical literature, in English, Russian and other European languages, is to be found in the study below by Sally Dalton-Brown. This also lists another eleven English translations of Pushkin’s novel.
The fool at eighteen, while he may.
The forest lost its secret awning,
The former hold no expectations,
9. the fraud: The reference is either to Prince A. N. Golitsyn (1773–1844) or to M. L. Magnitsky (1778–1855). Golitsyn changed from an atheist in his early years to an adherent of ‘official mysticism’, founding the Biblical Society’ and becoming Minister for National Education and Spiritual Affairs. Magnitsky was notorious for his monetary greed.
The frosted panes; and, pensive one,
The frosty beauty that it wore,
The fruits of learning, evil, good,
The furrowed snow melts on the street:
The galleries with people brimming,
The gamester wagers all his cash on
The garden and the avenue,
The general impressed the hall.
The generous casino hums;
The gentlemen were bowing lower,
The girlish daydreams that beset her
The girl’s abstracted lethargy.
The girl was to the altar led.
The glasses fizz with ancient wine;
The goblins cower at the sight;
The golden coal; a tiny flow
The gossip, rings, the tears, betrayals,
The grand monde’s conversation sparks;
The grate exhales the faintest glow.
The grave where my poor nurse is laid…
The grown-up girls near Tanya waiting,
The guests are taken by surprise,
The guests make room, as each one ventures
The guests who slowly try to reach
The happiness of youth has passed
The hateful freedom I so prize.
The heart in him, Eugene admired
The heart of a professed coquette!
The heart’s dark story had collected,
The heart’s impressions marked in tears.
The heart’s impressions marked in tears.
The hero, always rapturous,
The hero of my novel, pray,
The hero of my novel, pray,
The hero of our present novel!
The hetman of a gaming band,
The horses with their feeble pace.
The hostess sees a lady nearing,
The hours fly by, while the account
The hours race on and in her tussle
The hour when fate brought us together
The house is full; the boxes brilliant…
The house is full; the boxes brilliant;
The hubbub, storms, festivity,
The humble sinner, Dmitry Larin,
The husband, squire and erstwhile soldier,
The iambic tetrameter is an octosyllabic line with a weak and strong beat repeated four times (as in ‘The boy stood on the burning deck’). This is the so-called ‘masculine line’, which has a strong stress on the final syllable. The ‘feminine line’ adds an unstressed syllable (‘The boy stood on the burning vessel’). The Onegin stanza is made up of eight masculine lines and six feminine. It is a succinct line, which can be used more flexibly in Russian because of the greater variety of long and short words. English is more monosyllabic. Any stanza of my translation will have used on the average a third more words than the original. This may be an argument for employing the pentameter (five stresses) instead. It is after all the classic verse of English poetry just as the tetrameter is of Russian. But to do so would miss the cadences of the original and the lightness of Pushkin’s line. One danger of the tetrameter in English is that it can easily degenerate into a jingle as it did in the vers de soci&#233;t&#233; of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
The ice-clad river sheds a lustre
The idea for my translation originated in a series of seminars held in the Literature Department of the University of Essex in 1966, when Pushkin was much less known in Britain than he is now and considered untranslatable for some of the reasons given above. A group of us, questioning this and the notion of untranslatability as such, undertook a collective translation of Eugene Onegin. Our poet-professor, Donald Davie, was to provide the verse. The project failed and Davie died, but without his initiative I should never have embarked, many years later, on the present version, of which I’ll remark, adapting Pushkin’s lines:
The idle flow of rural ways.
The idleness of youthful minds,
The idol of each ripened daughter
The index gives the words that awed her:
The innocent might there have offered
The inscription tells the passer-by:
The intellect’s cold observations,
The intellect’s cold observations,
The internal chronology of the novel varies from between four and seven years’ distance from the occasions of writing it. This temporal proximity emphasizes Pushkin’s closeness to his characters, in particular Onegin. The time-frame of the story (1819–24) is only just out of kilter with the length of Pushkin’s exile (1820–25). From internal evidence we can work out the ages of the characters. Pushkin himself is twenty-one when he meets Onegin, Onegin is twenty-six, Lensky eighteen, Olga sixteen, Tatiana seventeen, and nineteen when she rejects Onegin. The poem is an epitaph to youth, including Pushkin’s. Tatiana marries, but after two years she is childless. ‘It is sad to think we’re given/Our youth to be enjoyed in vain’, Pushkin reflects in his last chapter (stanza 11).
Their ardour and their raving tongue.
Their bloody tongues – all these mismatches
Their bony fingers, sharp like nails,
Their charming tracks are followed by
Their charming words and glances cheat
Their charming words and glances cheat
Their classic gracefulness inspires
Their conversation, all in all,
Their country carts could be detected,
Their curved proboscises, moustaches,
Their daughters put their arms round Tanya.
Their fathers – friends and neighbours, they –
Their guileless conversation gathers,
Their hooves, horns, tusks and tufted tails,
Their hopeful prattle till they leave.
Their hopes, their pranks, their reveries.
Their humble journey to the end.
Their inborn virtue, sense of honour,
Their life extends before them yet,
Their messages in every space.
Their peaceful lives went on, retaining
Their ringing pitchers in the water;
Their ringing voices, while she waits
Their sensible deliberations
Their very slander’s dull and dreary.
Their waistcoats and impertinence,
The jealous agonies of lovers,
The joys of loving they forswore,
The kennels and their kith and kind
The kind entreaties and the fuss,
The ladies gathered closer to her;
The lake’s approach, the copse; has torn
21. the lame Turgenev: Nikolai Ivanovich Turgenev (1789–1871), Decembrist. Pushkin saw the brothers Turgenev, Alexander and Nikolai, frequently in St Petersburg between 1817 and 1820, writing his famous ode ‘Liberty’ (1817) in their flat. Nikolai’s influence can also be felt in the poem ‘The Village’ (1819), which deplores serfdom. The emancipation of the serfs motivated Nikolai’s entire career. In 1824 he left for Western Europe, returning in 1856, when the Decembrists were amnestied. The limp in his left foot was the result of a childhood illness.
The lamps illuminate the night;
The lamps illuminate the night;
The lancer, as his lot demanded,
The language of the novel, although largely the idiom of the nobility, extends into popular speech, for which Pushkin was often taken to task at the time by conservative critics. Surpassing previous writers in this respect, Pushkin took his Russian directly from the streets, the market-places and the country estates. In Onegin he honours his Decembrist friend Pavel Katenin for translating Corneille’s Le Cid (Chapter I, stanza 18). French neo-classicism and its heroic language were a model for the revolutionary nobility. Pushkin’s Boris Godunov, by contrast, abounds with ordinary speech, as does his historical novel The Captain’s Daughter. ‘Vulgar’ expressions enter into the most intimate of Pushkin’s lyrics. By and large, writers came from the gentry, that is the minor nobility, and shared on their estates a common culture with their serfs, as the Larin family does in Onegin, despite differences in status and education. The Larin family is not wealthy. It does not employ foreign tutors or governesses. The Westernized Onegin, by contrast, grows up, handed from one to another. Only the serf nurse looks after the two sisters.
The last two lines are the same as the final couplet of the present stanza 46.
The latest taste in toiletry,
‘The left? But where? What is so special?’
The legends of a Russian family,
The less we love a woman, woo her,
The letter of my maiden dear,
The letter’s ready, folded, who…
The letters, tears I’ve had from you.
The letter that you sent I’ve read.
The letter trembles in her hand,
The lies the journals told, the war,
The life Onegin lived was sainted;
The light attire of pretty women,
The little feet of ladies fly;
The lively image, witty joke
The locals snuffle to their neighbours;
The lofty passion not possessing,
The Lord forbid my ever meeting
5. The lover of Julie Wolmar: St Preux, hero of Rousseau’s Julie, ou la Nouvelle H&#233;lo&#239;se (Julie, or the New H&#233;loise, 1761). Julie and St Preux are lovers, but only until she marries and assumes her husband’s name, Wolmar.
The lover of Julie Wolmar,
The lover with new energy
The love you get from tender beauties
2. The lyc&#233;e Established by Alexander I in 1810 in the grounds of the Summer Palace outside St Petersburg to educate young gentlemen destined for a professional career. Pushkin boarded there from 1811 to 1817, regarding the school as his real home, and celebrated the date of its opening, 19 October 1811, with anniversary poems from 1817 until the year of his death. The model of the lyc&#233;e was taken from France.
The lyc&#233;e’s gardens saw me grow,
The madcap sage and rhetorician.
The maiden’s air, her lack of zest,
The maiden’s melancholy face.
The manor house stood in seclusion,
The man she loved so fearfully,
The masses of your mountains shone,
The master’s study, where he pleased
The men en face; a buzz goes round;
The men unfold the green baize tables,
The men, who, like dark picture frames,
The merchant, child of cautious daring,
The merchant’s up, the hawker’s calling,
The merry sound of boys on skates,
The mincing tomcat, sitting, purring
The mind grows dull, you must admit it,
The mistress vanished from the place
The moment for revenge arriving,
The monument’s forgot by people.
The moon amid her constellation,
The moon behind the hill takes cover
The moon has risen, and a veil,
The moon shines in the airy blue.
The moon, to whom when evening nears,
The moral right of the translator and editor has been asserted
The more disposed to us she gets,
The mother at her daughter’s going
The motley dross of Flemish art!
The Muse began to visit me.
The music now is tired of dinning;
Them with a fevered rhyme: he doubles
The mystery of the nuptial bed
The nails and teeth, and keep their sheen.
The naked flatness tires the eye.
The narrative poem Ruslan and Lyudmila (1817–20) was written, apart from its Introduction and Epilogue, before his exile and encounter with Byron’s ‘Southern’ poems. Its light-hearted tone links it much more with the later Byron of Don Juan, which prompted the writing of Onegin. Belonging to the exuberant tradition of mock-epic going back via Voltaire to Ariosto in the Renaissance, it is set in Kievan Russia, cradle of Russian civilization, in the reign of the Grand Duke Vladimir (c. 978–1015). Yet it is shot through with ironic references to contemporary St Petersburg, echoing Pushkin’s three wild years there after leaving school. The poem ensured Pushkin’s fame. Nothing like it had ever been heard before. Essentially a fairy tale, with some historical elements, it tells of the abduction of Lyudmila from her bridal bed by the wicked dwarf magician, Chernomor, and how her bridegroom, Ruslan, outwits and defeats three rivals to rescue her. It is to this playful atmosphere that Pushkin returns after three years of exile in ‘accursed Kishinev’, putting behind him his Romantic poems (except for The Gipsies) and introducing a new hero:
Then, as Onegin comes to meet her,
Then, by his stanza long tormented,
Then, by the briny breakers freshened,
Then calmly gaining rank, repute
12. Then drank… dressed: Omitted in the final text. After ‘And dressed’ there follows in Pushkin’s fair copy: but you’d not care to don/The article that he put on’.
Then drank his coffee, while through some
11. The Nereids: In Greek mythology, sea nymphs, the fifty daughters of Nereus and Doris.
The Nereids unceasing chorus,
The new still raved about the old.
Then got to like each other; then
The night has many starry clusters,
The nightingale sings in the gloam
The nightingale that newly sings.
The nightingale, through night’s long hours,
The night is warm and mute and still.
The nights of golden Italy
Then I, perhaps – I’ll be descending
Then Lensky Tanya; Kharlikova,
Then lingonberry juice is brought
Then my first cousin, one Buyanov,
The noble castle was constructed
7. The noise and feasts… excursions: This probably refers to the Green Lamp, a libertarian organization of young noblemen that Pushkin joined after leaving the lyc&#233;e and that, already conspiratorial, foreshadowed the Decembrist movement.
The noise of feasts and fierce discussions,
The noise of sea, the rocks’ cascade,
The noisy audience greets the night;
The noisy multitude admiring,
The noontide of my life is starting,
The notelets of six pages sheer,
The novel-in-verse, as Pushkin chose to call his poem, is a workshop out of which his later prose fiction emerges. His Dedication to his publisher, written after he had completed five chapters, pinpoints the character of his new work:
Then seats her on a chair, proceeding
Then she abandons strength and will.
Then started talking once again
13. Then suddenly… French book: This refers to the third stage of Pushkin’s exile at his family estate at Mikhailovskoye, when the Muse is transformed into Tatiana.
Then suddenly this picture cleared
Then supper came and close of day,
Then Tanya hurried to be nigh,
‘Then tell me why you’re so begrudging,
Then the Skotinins, grey-haired, prospering
Then to her husband turned, retiring.
Then to Monsieur passed on her trust.
Then, to requite their indiscretion,
Then turned to household matters, grew
The nurse might just have known of it,
Then… what was that?… a bear-like tread!
Then… why not let a poet play
Then will I start a poem – oh,
The oaken boughs with flocks of snow;
The oak wood’s leafy cool and shadows,
The object of his love and songs –
The object of my guiltless verses,
The object of your thoughts from far,
The objects that surround her here,
10. Theocritus: Ancient Greek poet of idylls, third century BC. Russian pre-Romantics, seeking a national alternative to Russian rococo, drew on Homer and Theocritus. Decembrist economists, on the other hand, dismissed the entire classical poetic tradition as of no practical use.
The oddball was already angry.
The oddness not to be depicted,
The odious bear comes grunting, lumbering;
The Okhta girl, her jug held tight,
The old corv&#233;e with light quit-rent;
The old man, by much work perplexed,
The old Romantic hero is brought back to St Petersburg and placed in the social context he has deserted. While he bears the scars of his predecessors, he is now the subject of irony.
13. [15, 16]: The omitted stanzas, 15 and 16, deal with the theme of jealousy.
14. [9]: The omitted stanzas are of three kinds: those written and dropped; those which Pushkin intended to write but never got round to; and fictitious ones in the ironic manner of Sterne, Byron and Hoffmann. Together they constitute an invisible subtext.
The omitted stanzas gave rise to frequent reproofs and gibes (no doubt most just and witty). The author candidly confesses that he deleted from his novel an entire chapter describing Onegin’s journey through Russia. It was incumbent on him to indicate this omitted chapter by means of dots or a numeral; but in order to avoid confusion he decided it would be better to mark the last chapter as number eight instead of nine, and to sacrifice one of its closing stanzas:
The one-armed prince was up and nodding
The Onegin stanza looks like a sonnet, but lacks the sonnet’s traditional antithesis of octet and sestet. It is more a mixture of contrasts of the kind listed in the Dedication. Antithesis and repetition are its building blocks. Pushkin’s poetry has been called a ‘poetry of grammar’. In Onegin, more than elsewhere, the poet plays with a language that is just settling into a standard form. If Pushkin sought a ‘nakedness’ in prose, he uses the bare elements of grammar – adverbs, conjunctions, interrogatives – to construct the Onegin stanza. Stanza 22 in Chapter I, for example, turns on five repetitions of ‘still’, cut off by a single ‘already’ in the final couplet:
The only law I recognize,
5. the only poetic figure in Russian history: Letter to his brother, L. S. Pushkin, first half of November 1824, Pushkin, Sobranie Sochinenii, vol. 9, p.119.
The opera now calls to us,
The order of the fare’s habitual:
The original Chapter VIII was meant to describe Onegin’s journey between leaving his estate and returning to St Petersburg. Chapter IX would have been the present Chapter VIII. In 1853, Pavel Katenin, writing to Pavel Annenkov, Pushkin’s biographer, suggested a political reason for the chapter’s exclusion:
‘The other one – a little patience…
9. The Other Version: The reference is to Chuzhoy tolk (1795), a satirical verse narrative by Ivan Dmitriyev (1760–1837). The title may be translated as The Other Opinion’ or The Opinion of Others’. The poem ridicules the overblown style of the ode, attributing mercenary aims to its authors. The satirist and the lyric poet are characters in the poem.
The pain of persevering toil,
The parquet cracking under heel.
The passage of the seasons shapes this chronology, forming the backdrop not only of the novel, but of Pushkin’s generation and life as such:
The passing bee or butterfly.
The passing hours Onegin’s counting,
The pearl-edged waves that flowed, receded,
The peasants there have all the riches,
13. the pensive vampire: Pushkin comments in his note: ‘A tale wrongly attributed to Lord Byron.’ During a stay in Switzerland in 1816 Byron, Shelley, Mary Shelley and Byron’s physician Polidori competed in writing horror stories of which the most successful and famous was Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. Byron composed a fragment, The Vampyre, which Polidori later turned into a novel (1819).
The people are so pale and weary,
The perils of its mountain passes;
The pilgrim makes her homeward climb.
The pistols glistened; soon the mallets
The pistols glistened; soon the mallets
18. The pistols… to the place: A Lepage pistol had six edges on the outside of the barrel; the inside was smooth. Powder was poured into the barrel through the opening and secured with a wad. The bullets were inserted with the help of a mallet and ramrod. The flint, which was held in place by a special screw, was raised and tiny grains of powder were poured on to the pan, a steel shelf near an opening in the breech. The powder would burst into flame when struck and ignite the powder charge inside the barrel, causing the bullet to be fired. One of the seconds would load the pistols, while the other observed him.
The plain inscription quickly, causing
The play of heel, and the moustache;
The plethora of goods and baggage:
The ploughman rests beside their brink
58. the Poet: An ironic reference, underlined by the capital ‘P’ and the archaic Russian spelling, to Mikhail Muravyov (1757–1807), an insignificant poet and founder of Russian Sentimentalism. In his note 9, Pushkin quotes the lines of Muravyov’s poem ‘To the Goddess of the Neva’, from which he lifts the phrase ‘leaning on the granite’.
The poet, great but underrated,
The poet, heatedly contending,
The poet is no more perturbed,
The poet’s dead… already, though,
The poet’s fervent talk and mind,
The poet’s memory has fled
The poet’s sacred frenzy, strides
The poet’s young, romantic story
The poet who confessed his heart
The poor folk, the secluded nook
The prankster might – so he’d been fearing –
The priests and guests imbibed and swallowed,
The prima donna, the ballet?
The Prince looks at Onegin: ‘Ah!
The Princess an impassioned letter,
The princess Aunt Yelena’s wearing
The purl of streams, the woodland shade,
12. The Pyrenees… B’s shadow: The stanza refers to two revolutions of 1820 that shook post-Napoleonic Europe and influenced Decembrism in Russia. The Spanish revolution was defeated in 1823 by the French, mandated by the Holy Alliance of France, Austria, Russia and Prussia. The Neapolitan was crushed by Austria in 1821, assisted by England and France. The ‘one-armed prince was general Alexander Konstantinovich Ipsilanti (1792–1828), a Greek serving in the Russian army, who lost his arm in the battle of Dresden. In 1821 he led an abortive rising of the Greeks in Turkish Moldavia. Pushkin knew Ipsilanti in Kishinev and supported his endeavours, but was later disillusioned with him. Pushkin uses the former name Morea for the Peloponnese. From Kishinev Ipsilanti directed a secret society known as the Hetairae, which had its headquarters in the Pelo-ponnese and fomented a rising there. ‘L refers probably to Louis Pierre Louvel 1783–1820), a saddler, who planned to kill all the Bourbons, assassinating ‘B’, duc de Berry, heir to the French throne in Paris, on 13 February 1820.
The Pyrenees shook with foreboding,
The question not infrequently:
There are no inns. In some cold cabin
There are two hearts yet, I believe,
There at the door a ball dictator,
There breathes a guileless maiden’s yearning.
There, by the brook, in deepest shade,
There, done! Enough! No more diversions!
There entered portly Pustyakov;
There for a long time skies are clear,
The regimental band is playing,
There hangs for show a highfalutin’
There, in the wings that gave me shelter,
There is another technical problem – the ‘feminine’, or unstressed, ending (e.g. ‘rapture’), for which there are relatively few rhymes in English compared with what Russian’s inflected vocabulary offers, so that the translator is too often reduced to using the ‘shon’ words – ‘machination’, ‘domination’ – to which I, too, plead guilty. Instead I have allowed myself near-rhymes: ‘Lyudmila’/’fellow’, ‘service’/’impervious’, ‘Latin’/’smattering’. While feminine rhyming is more problematic, I have also used near or half-rhymes for many ‘masculine’ (stressed) endings, where I thought an exact rhyme would constrain the meaning: ‘live’/‘love’, ‘face’/’peace’, ‘Muse’/’joys’. These two practices have been customary in English poetry since at least the start of the last century. I have noticed an excess of padding and distortion in previous translations that keep resolutely to exact rhyming. But not every half-rhyme is euphonious, and in the end I’ve had to rely on my ear. In the metre too I have introduced the irregularity of a trochee (strong beat/weak beat) at the beginning of a line, again in common with poetic usage, certainly since Shakespeare. Although I am familiar with previous translations, at no point in my own did I consult them, but from Nabokov’s literal version I borrowed several phrases.
There is no coquetry in her –
There is no doubt, alas, that Eugene’s
There is no greater prize today.
There is no joy for her remaining,
18. 39, 40: There is no stanza missing here. Pushkin is probably trying to convey a sense of passing time.
There Mickiewicz sang his passion
There, not the secret pangs of villainy
There, on her own, he finds Tatiana,
There, Ozerov shared the elation
There Pestel… for the tyrants,
There’s coughing still and stamping, slapping,
There’s coughing still and stamping, slapping,
There’s jostling as the hall is filling,
There’s no securer place at all,
There’s not a trace of last night’s fret,
There’s one thing you should hear from me:
There sounds the lyre with clearer measures.
There’s something missing to refresh her;
There’s Southern sun and sea tomorrow…
There’s very little taste on show
There the mazurka thrives, retaining
There, too, a tombstone can be found
There was Didelot, in glory bathing;
There was for the man of imagination and moral passion a basic maladjustment to society in which only the student of society – the social philosopher, the historian, the novelist – could find himself and learn to function. And to deal with the affairs of society, he had to learn to speak its language, he had – as Goethe and Hugo did, as Pushkin did just before he died – to train himself to write in prose.
There were preserved on many pages
There were some books he’d not forsaken
6. There were the Russian tents unfurled: The Caucasus was first annexed by Peter the Great in 1722.
There were the Russian tents unfurled.
The ringing laughs and jollity
The rising dawn does not affect her;
The rising of the dawn, she loved
The road’s monotonous delights:
The road to find out what it yields;
The Romantic narratives that Pushkin wrote in the first four years of his exile throw more light on the place that the novel-inverse occupies in Pushkin’s life and work. Written under the influence of Byron’s early ‘Southern’ poems (Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, The Corsair, The Giaour – all referred to in Onegin), each bears the imprint of exile. A fortuitous holiday took Pushkin away from Kishinev at the beginning of his exile to the Caucasus and the Crimea in the company of a friendly family, the Rayevskys. From them he discovered Byron and was helped by the English governess and the sons and daughters of the family to read him in English, of which he had no previous knowledge. However, he never developed sufficient mastery of English to read Byron satisfactorily in the original and depended on French prose translations. Two of his Romantic poems, The Captive of the Caucasus (1820–21) and The Fountain at Bakhchisaray (1821–3), germinated in this exotic environment. The first directly anticipates Onegin in its aim ‘to depict that indifference to life and its pleasures, that premature ageing of the soul, which are the distinctive features of the youth of the nineteenth century’. A nameless nobleman, fleeing into nature from the constraints of civilization, falls captive to a Caucasian tribe among whom he languishes amid the splendours of the mountain scenery. Emotionally dead, he cannot respond to the local girl who helps him to escape across a river and drowns herself while he looks on without response. He is an early Onegin, lethal to himself and others, yet elegiac rather than demonic in disposition. Just as he bears no name, so he is hardly a character, which Pushkin was the first to admit. The poem is more a series of lyrical and descriptive fragments. One of these is an invocation to freedom by the Prisoner that appealed to the young Decembrists:
The roof, the fence and flower plot,
The room is packed, the noise is loud;
The rooms of Olga and Tatiana
The rose upon a flaming cheek
The rosy seal, a paper band.
25. The rosy seal: A round piece of sticky paper used to seal envelopes.
The route of the Journey is unclear. It is possible that Onegin spent some time abroad. He is away for some three and a half years. Since the surviving stanzas of the Journey represent him rushing from place to place, driven by ennui, it is unlikely that he spent all of that time in Russia. Moreover, his return to St Petersburg is compared with Chatsky’s leap from boat to ball’ in Chapter VIII, stanza 13, line 14.
The Russian sickness of today.
The sadness and the pleasant torments,
The salutation each extends;
The samovar’s inviting Lensky.
The satirist’s animadversion.
The scene is bright and white all round.
The seasons intertwine with the characters. Tatiana naturally falls in love in spring, while Onegin’s belated passion is compared with the ‘cold and ruthless’ storms of autumn. Pushkin balances Tatiana’s heady feelings as she waits for Onegin at the end of Chapter III with down-to-earth similes from nature:
The second rows of fruit liqueurs
The secret and secluded den
The secrets of the grave’s abysses,
These doubts resolved, tomorrow they
These graced, at eighteen years of age,
These graces of young Moscow now
These have not changed at all, remaining
These made up Olga… but just glance
The senses of a gentleman;
The sentimental verselets, all
The serf blessed fate for what it sent.
The servants weep, farewell is hard:
These sufferers hope to reinforce
These things took on a different look.
These were the secret legends, fictions
These words to all her rural ties:
The sex’s tricks, he leaves the hall,
The shaggy footman is behind her,
The shame I’ve suffered all alone,
The sharp, chilled mind and gloomy bent
The shepherd sings still as before,
The shot had gone right through him. How
The shrubs, the path and where it plummets
The shuttered rooms, where he had spent
The shy young girl that he’d forsaken,
The sight of them brings on the spleen.
The silence of his study brought him
The silent woods, armed with a novel
The simple product ready given.
The singer of Gulnare repeating,
The skies shine with a bluish sheen,
The sky. All’s silent; save the roar
The sky already breathed with autumn,
The sky behind you, blue, transparent,
The sky when greyish clouds are passing,
The slayer of her brother. Woe,
The slayer of the youthful poet?’
The sleigh is ready; Eugene, seated,
The sleighs, and, at late dawn, the blazing
The slumber of our Russian maiden,
The small feet of Terpsichore.
The snores of heavy Pustyakov,
The snow, and wife he found a bore
The social hubbub left him bored;
The sometimes onerous ministration
The songs engendered by their beauty.
The songs inspired by you, and full
The sorceress arrives again.
The sound of reed pipe gently played on:
The sound opinions he’d acquired.
The South shines out in variegated
The spirit of his judgements, prizing
The springtime of my days has vanished,
The spurs of Chevalier Gardes jangle,
The square to which the people rally
The squire brings daughters ripe in size,
The starry rays invade the air.
The stars and heaven’s brightest light,
The state of nature, which the author
The stones, and soon the sunken town
The storm has blown, the finest flower
The storm of 1812 descended –
The story of the human race:
The straw before the thresh-barn massing,
The study of our youthful sage.
The sudden tender look he’d given,
The suggested location of the characters’ estates is imaginary, but the descriptions of Onegin’s estate in the first stanza of Chapter II and stanza 15 of Chapter VII (when Tatiana visits his manor house) reflect Pushkin’s family estate at Mikhailovskoye. For an alternative location see Nabokov’s Commentary, Eugene Onegin, vol. 2, p. 31 and vol. 3, pp. 111–12.
6. the Summer Park: The Summer Gardens, a fashionable park in St Petersburg.
The sun already shone more seldom.
The sun climbs high into the azure,
The sun disports; in dirty cinders
The table, too. I’ll lie down later.
The talk, though, of their spouses dear
The tapers’ glare, the music’s clangour,
The tears and joys she will not share
The tear stains, where? No trace, no trace,
The tears that surely you’d be shedding
The theatre’s heartless legislator,
The things that every poet covets:
The third at night-time. Early waking,
The third day he could no more muster
The thirst for knowledge, thirst for work,
The threats, the rumours, the predictions,
The threats, the vows, the put-on fear,
The three kibitkas teem with baggage,
The time had come, she fell in love.
The timeless mutter of the soul,
The tongue of golden Italy
The trace of banks and frozen river;
The trail to it is overgrown,
The trees in winter’s silver frond,
The trenchant mark of fingernails,
The trumpery of hateful days,
The truth, therefore, was plain enough –
The two aunts wink and in like manner
The two foes stand with lowered eye.
The two old ladies weep, embrace
The usual three kibitkas manage
The vagrant Melmoth, restless, gloomy,
The valley’s dark. The grove is still
The venerable carriage, gliding,
The vernal wind that fans my face
The very maiden he once met
The very moment I remember
The very mount you ride is wary
The very window-frames vibrated;
The vessel of his slanderer;
The vial of love’s enticing brew –
The victims, some of martial deeds,
The voice of lover, friend or knave
The waltz revolves, the music swirling,
The Wandering Jew or the Corsair
15. The Wandering Jew: The legend of the Wandering Jew was common at the time. Pushkin’s sources are probably Mathew Lewis’s (1775–1818) The Monk (1796) and Jan Potocki’s (1761–1815) enormous novel The Manuscript Found in Sara-gossa, published between 1803 and 1814.
22. the war: The reference is presumably to the war with Poland of 1830, another anachronism.
The watchful looks of worried servants!
The waves profound, eternal choir
The waves, successively descending,
The wax that, sinking, leaves behind
The way is opened: war defied
19. The Well-Meaner: Pushkin’s note reads: ‘A journal edited by the late A. Izmailov in a rather slipshod way.’ Pushkin and his friends treated the journal as a joke and privately read line 4 as With a phallus in their hand’.
The whispers, laughs of stupid men…’
‘The whole damn lot there need replacing.
The window over them that looks
The windows shuttered, chalked and vacant,
The wind that heralds morn is blowing,
The winter like a marmot pent.
The wish to meet, though, was compelling,
The withered years of our estate,
The world around us ceaselessly,
The worldly tumult and the jesting,
The world without some recognition.
The wreath upon the bough is gone.
They bring in a guitar, too, then she
They burn like youthful lovers’ kisses
They’d shared their leisure time, a meal
The years of youth give way to caution,
They fasted twice a year for sinning,
They find her somewhat unexpected,
They fly as swiftly as a dart.
They fly off from the banks at once.
They found each other dull, ill-suited;
They freshen in the rain of passion,
They glimpse ahead the golden crosses
They heap up silver with their spades;
They laugh together. Guests now enter
They leave the lady safe and sound.
They’ll show how fate has shaped your years.
They loved round swings that sent them spinning,
They love you… like your kith and kin.
They needed kvas like air for living;
The young have nothing to regret,
The young hostess, who waits untiring,
The young things skip, anticipating;
They reached the bank, where she, concluding
They’re aimless – that’s what makes one weep –
They’re harnessed to the master carriage,
They’re met with the formality,
They’re nothing more than lowly nature,
They say, though, you’re unsociable;
They seat the two young friends with care.
They settle to a game of chess
They shout, laugh, argue through the meal,
They sit right opposite Tatiana;
They stop – just by St Khariton
They summoned Olga to provide it.
They sweetly ask for her confession
They take her to their rooms, make friends,
They touchingly shed tears, three drops
They travelled seven days and nights.
They’ve missed the fully fledged Onegin,
They went. At some remove, meanwhile,
They went or changed, no longer bidden…
They whisper to her: ‘Watch, look up!’
They will not think of us… and may
They will receive us with delight.’
They would arrive and overstay.
They would, reciprocating greetings,
Thinking that liberty and peace
Th’ intoxicating Orpheus.
Thirst still replenishes the beakers
Thirty-two steps and then diverted
This and the roaring chasm thwart her;
This angel, this proud devil – well,
This development was anticipated in 1964 by Vladimir Nabokov who asserted that Pushkin’s characters were no more than stylized impersonators of figures in Western literature and that the only Russian element of importance in the novel was the language. His translation is a hybrid of ‘period’ and artifice. For every historically specific word in the original he finds or invents a corresponding archaism or neologism (‘mollitude’, ‘dulcitude’, ‘juventude’, ‘ancientry’, ‘buttsome’) which few, if any, readers will have encountered. In this aestheticizing of the past Nabokov anticipates the postmodern translation of the American Douglas Hofstadter. While Nabokov still holds the text sacrosanct, apart from his bizarre archaisms, Hofstadter turns it into a quarry of personal interpolations and alterations, retaining only stanza, rhyme and metre, all, he assures us, in a Pushkinian sense of fun.
This Grandison was smart at cards,
This group of friends would congregate
This horseman, crowned with papal blessing,
This is the first time that we grace
This light existence, every dram!
11. This man of fate… rack of leisure: The ‘man of fate is Napoleon. The pope attended his coronation in Paris. ‘Rack of leisure refers to Napoleon’s imprisonment on St Helena.
This man of fate, through wars progressing,
This most unpleasant t&#234;te-&#224;-t&#234;te,
This muddled neophyte of mine.
20. [38]: This omitted stanza reinforces the previous one by suggesting that Lensky might have become a Kutuzov (the Russian general who defeated Napoleon), a Nelson, a Napoleon in exile or a Ryleyev (Pushkin’s Decembrist friend) executed by Nicholas I on the gallows.
This one lacked conscience, that one sense;
‘This pomp, Onegin, these excesses,
This sets the jealous poet cheering;
22. 16: This stanza is defective. There is a gap of two syllables in the middle of line 9, indicated by dots. Nor does the last word in line 9, ‘tiranov (‘tyrants), rhyme with the last word in line 12, ‘sklonyaya (‘inclining / persuading) except on the second syllable (‘a’/’ya’), although they fit metrically. My ‘tyrants’/‘inclining misrhyme in a similar way. The stanza moves from the activities of the Northern Society of the Decembrists to those of the South.
This stanza saw its publication
This translation first published in Penguin Classics 2008
This was the art of tender passion,
This way, I’ll lead you. Here, we enter
This weighty tome a passing trader
This woeful note than to this meeting
This wondrous look appears to mend her:
Those dreams extolling liberty,
Those two in uniform, official…
Though he might struggle, short of death,
Though I dipped into, formerly,
Though I’ll return to him, unfailing,
Though not a palace, street or ball
Though part of it, he did not rue
Though slender work. With you I’ve known
Thought only of Tatiana, not
Though what’s Romantic here I simply
7. three novels of the hour: In a draft Pushkin refers to Melmoth, Ren&#233;, Constant’s Adolphe’ as three novels which Onegin always took with him.
Three shapely pairs of women’s feet
Three years since then, and who should wander
Through cut-steel barrels went the bullets,
Through cut-steel barrels went the bullets,
Through flowers to the brook she flies,
Through four-and-twenty hours you’ll never
Throughout, his soul was by such signs,
Throughout the evening my Onegin
Through sleeping streets, past houses darkened
Through solid rows aristocratic,
Through spectacles old age divines
Thus an old soldier takes delight
Thus, classicism I placate:
Thus does the shadow of a storm
Thus Eugene preached. Tatiana, crying,
Thus first you came into my ken;
Thus (I’m the first one to confess)
Thus, slowly, on a mountain-side
Thus storms in autumn, cold and ruthless,
Thwarted desire tormenting him,
Tight-buttoned, mute and still as stone;
Till modish rings had been located.
Till twenty-six, and still his soul
‘Time to get up, past six, we’re late,
Time was, he stood upon a pedestal,
Time was, no sooner had day risen,
Time was, on Sundays, by this casement,
Time was, she would have written in a
Time was, there hung a secret wreath,
Time was, two girls in evening leisure
Time was, when cool debauch was lauded
Time was, when virginally grieving
Time would have taught me to extinguish
Tired of amusing proud society,
Tire&#180; d’une lettre particuli&#233;re.
10. to adapt the rhythms… verbal contortions: James E. Falen, Alexander Pushkin: A Novel in Verse (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), p. xxviii.
8. To Albion the seas are granted: Britain’s defeat of the French (and Spanish) at Trafalgar in 1805 ensured its supremacy over the seas.
To Albion the seas are granted
To all her various relations.
To all its monstrous images.
To all my kinsfolk, finally
To all who gaze on them magnetic,
To animate a linen cloth.
To anybody or to dawdle
To arm each glance and every phrase,
To ask her whether he’ll be pardoned,
To benefit us everywhere,
To be no ball of prejudice
To bidding Eugene a farewell.
To bid their mistresses goodbye.
To bring back briefly youth again.
To bring him medicine, looking tearful,
To burn – while reason every moment
To buy it, if he could include
19. To call his people: Presumably inaccuracy on the part of Pushkin, since Onegin has brought no men with him, only Guillot.
To call his people. Straightaway,
To call to on the other side.
To capture with enamoured eyes
To carry on her conversations
To catch the star while still in motion
To cheat on us, each hour, each day,
To cheer up the imagination
To cornfields in a noisy cloud.
To court their semi-Russian neighbour;
To criticism inattentive,
To curious dreams was not addicted,
To daily dinners Tanya’s taken
Today all this is antiquated,
Today it is my turn to speak.
Today, like ladies, understated,
Today, quite different, chilling dreams;
Today such love’s anomalous,
Todd, W. Mills, Fiction and Society in the Age of Pushkin: Ideology, Institutions, and Narrative (Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University Press, 1986)
To dear Tatiana, triumphing,
10. to depict that indifference… nineteenth century: A. S. Pushkin, Stikhotvoreniya, vol. 1 (Leningrad: Sovetsky Pisatel’, 1955), p. 677.
2. To die from him will be delightful: Love for a villain was a common theme in contemporary Romantic literature and folklore (cf. Maturin’s Melmoth the Wanderer).
‘To die from him will be delightful.
To dominate his every thought.
To do so, feigning reservation,
To down a Strasbourg pie and beef-steaks,
To down hot cutlets one by one,
To drain on credit two or three
To dreaming endlessly addicted,
To dreaming endlessly addicted,
To dream of objects dear to me;
To each and all. So, now, hurrah!
To English spleen – the Russian version,
To Eve, our ancestress: what’s granted
To fall into a swoon or faint;
To fame and freedom dedicated,
To far Moldavia’s steppes, where he
To feed a dream, and cause a clamour
To fight with either him or you,
To find a grave for one to lie in;
To find the keeper of the manor
To flee Onegin and his team;
To follow you in all directions,
To folly now you’ve paid your due.
To Fontenelle, and when he’d read him,
To foreign parts with me, but fate
To frighten people was their mission.
To futile enterprise consigned.
To futile enterprise consigned.
Together let us take a rest,
Together they arrived, and none
Together with a spouse well nourished,
Together with you, now I weep;
To God knows where, without a trace.
To gossip of this kind; but she,
To grandsons of Apollo sacred,
To greet a hero so impatient.
To grieve in, chased by aching love,
To hear this sensible advice;
To help the poor folk? Weren’t you nearing
To her: in winter, tales of horror,
To hide a feeling or a thought
To him, forever persecuted
To him I shall be true for life.
To his abrasive disputations,
To his penates now returning,
To hiss off Cleopatra, Phaedra,
To his Tatiana, unforewarned.
To housemaids’ quarters. All are needy
To husbandly opinions, too;
To introduce a new regime.
To joke, to judge, not without spite
To keep a store of every fable,
To kindle a defiant passion,
To kiss with so much pain and hunger
To languish after your beloved,
‘To Larina.’ ‘Tatiana!’ ‘Oh then,
Told in the darkness of the night,
To learn to live more sensibly,
To leave the fields’ and woods’ seclusion,
To listen and to understand
To listen to the sea’s dull boom,
To listen to what people say,
To living in domestic bliss;
To look at you with cheerful gaze
4. Tolstoy: Count Fyodor Petrovich Tolstoy (1783–1875), artist.
To mark the days we have in store.
To mark the patriarchal dust
To match a dream with tuneful phrase,
To me alone in his sad dawn,
To meet Eugene, who promptly ran off
To meet his wife. The Princess looks
To melt in torments at your hand,
4. ‘tomfoolery’: A simple card game, played today in Russia mainly by children.
To mitigate the solar rays.
Tomorrow just like yesterday.
Tomorrow, Tanya we shall show
To Moscow, to the bridal fair!
To move a cover or a chair;
To murder every evening thus?’
Too dangerous for Olga’s age),
To offer up the clarity
To offer you a pledge, dear bard,
Took Olga and Tatiana then
‘Too late now, everything is settled,
To open up the house and greet her.
To our dance as round we go.
To paint a Petersburgian ball.
To perfect aims – a paragon.
To pick it up, the bear is nigh,
To plan a grave that lauds his name
To play “tomfoolery” with me.
To play upon the spacious lawn,
To play with an unravelled tress
To pluck our double-headed eagle,
3. To pluck… pitched his tent: Alexander’s authority was drastically undermined by these losses and the initial failures of the 1812 war, symbolized here by the ‘plucking’ of the Russian eagle. Napoleon’s tent refers to the one he constructed on a raft in the middle of the Neman river where he conducted the negotiations of the Tilsit peace treaty. By appearing here several minutes before Alexander, Napoleon played the host, so humiliating the Tsar with his cheerful welcome.
To praise these proud ones with my lyre,
To prop up pillows by his head,
To punish my naivet&#233;.
To put our knowledge on display.
To put some new apparel on.
To put some new apparel on.
To puzzle out an epigraph,
Toquato’s octaves drawing near!
To rack the heart, and when we tire,
To rain and flax and cattle-yard…’
To raise its value when we own it,
To raise the cock and, taking aim,
To raise the dress around her flowing;
To reach again her fields and lanes,
To read their work to a beloved
Tormented, too, by quick successes,
To satisfy our whims abundant
To seat a small dog on his sled,
To see among this company
To see an aunt, who, with consumption
To see that he’s still loved; and longs
To see you as each minute flies,
To see you, shores of Tauris, when
To sell his herd of cast-off steeds;
To send him off to meet his kind.
To sigh for whom it is her lot,
To sighs of passion or to praise.
To sigh – while inwardly you think:
To sing of someone, God knows whom,
To skip or play, but often, rather,
To sleep, poor thing, she could not yield
To sleep, take coffee, pay attention
To smug nonentities that near it,
To solve which he would rack his mind,
To somewhere far off, borne by fate,
To Spartan prose the years are turning,
To Spartan prose the years are turning,
To speak of him; how tedious
To speak to her of yesterday;
To stormy errors and delusions
To stretch out someone on the ground
To struggle further with my passion;
To take a breath of frosty air,
To tales of other people’s passions,
To talk of Juvenal or set a
To talk to her of this or that;
To teach his kids their ABC.
To tease was once his recreation,
To tell it in an adult manner
To tempt a maiden’s innocence
To tend a sick man day and night
To the Assembly, too, they bring her,
To the clavier he’d wander, playing
To the enchanting bow obedient,
To them the door is opened wide,
To the old woman mournfully.
To the reviewers to devour;
To this demand for satisfaction
To this offensive passion, to
To those first strophes that I wrote…
To trap it more assuredly;
To trumpet, dagger and the mask,
Touches her hand hot-bloodedly
To understand him’s quite beyond her:
To us have long since been old hat.
To view his image in a mirror
To visit her she grants him freedom,
To wanton glory pay no heed.
Towards a corner seat he takes her,
Towards that strange, deserted place.
To warm the heart, to entertain,
To warn his forebears to expect
To wash her face, her shoulders, breast.
To wash its snout – in this she saw
To watch the dancing stars receding
To wear the ties of marriage yet,
To weep on my untimely urn,
Towers, pharmacies and stores with fashions,
To what far desert will you wander,
To what the steward had to mention,
To where a secret tree is planted;
To where the young Vladimir lies,
To which he’d given mute consent.
To which Onegin in his glory
To whisper to it her desire.
To white-stone Moscow gallop, as
To whom the monde awards a carrot,
‘To whom, then?’asked the ancient dame.
To whom you pledged your heart’s affection,
To wish to hold your knees, and, pouring
To wreak the other one’s destruction…
To write a gravestone madrigal.
To write a poem and discuss
To yield to him old Kremlin’s keys.
14. Toy regiment… deadly foes: The stanza refers to the Semyonovsky regiment founded by Peter the Great (1672–1725), who modelled it on the half-boy, half-toy regiment that he created in his boyhood. The ‘tyrant was the mad Paul I (1754–1801, father of Alexander I and Nicholas I), slain by a gang of courtiers with the connivance of the Semyonovsky regiment, who were meant to be guarding him. The same regiment staged a rebellion in 1820, foreshadowing the Decembrist movement. Sergei Muravyov-Apostol (1796–1826) and Mikhail Bestuzhev-Riumin (1801–26), the hanged Decembrists leaders, had served in it.
Toy regiment of Peter-Titan,
6. training a mirror on the moon: Another method of divination whereby a future husband was supposed to appear in the mirror’s reflection.
Transform the field into a slough,
Translated with an Introduction and Notes by
Translation and editorial material copyright © Stanley Mitchell, 2008
Transparent still, the woods turn green,
Treading on toes at every stall,
Treat the occasion as a jest,
12. trepak: An energetic peasant dance.
Triquet, a poet with a knack,
Triquet, in truly Gallic manner,
Triquet with ceremonial sign
True sadness put him on his mettle,
True tenderness in it she sees,
Truly: by means of magnetism
38. Tsargrad: Old Russian name for Constantinople.
24. Tsimlyansky: A sparkling wine from Tsimlyanskaya Stanitsa, a Cossack settlement on the Don.
Tsimlyansky wine goes on display,
24. Tul’ chin: a small town in the Podolsk province housing the headquarters of the Second Army under the command of Count Wittgenstein (1768–1842) and the central group of the Southern Society.
16. Tumansky: Vasily Ivanovich Tumansky (1800–1860), a minor poet, worked with Pushkin as a clerk for Count Vorontsov, Pushkin’s employer in Odessa.
Turgenev hearkened to their aim
12. turnpike pillars: The turnpike pillars belonged to a triumphal arch, celebrating victory over Napoleon, which was still unfinished when the Larins entered Moscow.
Turn to the elder sister now.
Twin carriage lamps pour out a jocund
28. ’Twixt a Lafitte and a Cliquot: This means during either dinner or supper: the meal would begin with Lafitte, a dry wine, and end with champagne, Cliquot.
‘Twixt a Lafitte and a Cliquot
Two hearts, a torch and tiny flowers;
Two-horned, upon her left, at once
Two-legged creatures in their millions
Two merchants, meeting, make their call.
Two neighbours there have met to chatter
Two oaklings stand, and leave them there.
Two Petriads, a Russian grammar
Two rowans and a little cottage,
Two weeks a matchmaker kept coming
Unable to appreciate it,
Under the silver moonlight streaming,
Under your lonely roof take cover,
Undressed and settled into bed,
Unfathomable to the mind;
1833–6 Unhappy period in St Petersburg: humiliations at court (with requests for retirement from government service refused), mounting debts and marital insecurity. Relatively little creative work: The Captain’s Daughter (completed 1836) and some outstanding lyrics.
Unmetered verses, by tradition,
Unruffled is the winter track.
Until Br&#233;guet with watchful chime
Until her cheeks desist from burning.
Until the grave invited down
Until the Muse gave them a language:
Unto the stringent monde’s attention
Unwell, he writes with feeble hand
Up at the gate retainers vie
Upbraided him that way and this.
Up from a brimming dish of water
Uphill, relieved to be alive;
Up in the gods they clap, ebullient,
Upon a bench, the ancient dame
Upon a bunch of buttercups;
Upon a goose’s neck, rotating,
Upon a jade, unkempt, depleted.
Upon an album’s fleeting pages
Upon an alien public set,
Upon a pine branch, low inclining,
Upon a post-chaise Eugene sped,
Upon a shaky bench he lays her
Upon a soul long dead, does all
Upon a young soul craving sadness;
Upon blue blocks of hewn-out ice
Upon her balcony, preceding
Upon her fevered tongue lies drying
Upon her lips her breath has died,
Upon her shoulder; when a tread
Upon his beaver collar, petals
Upon his brow the hue of death,
Upon life’s furrows; in its wake
Upon life’s furrows
Upon my conscience: do believe me,
Upon the first leaf you’ll be meeting
Upon the joyous seashore, safe –
Upon the modish word ideal;
Upon the parquet floors of halls,
Upon the sea’s free crossway wending,
Upon the sleeping river, gliding,
Upon the stove would lift a paw
Upon the waters’ steamy flow,
Upon which, let us part, farewell!
Up to this day our proud tongue shows
Us all with overwhelming rays
50. vasisdas: A window-pane. ‘Vasisdas’ has been taken to be a corruption either of fortochka, a ventilation-pane used in Russian windows, or of the French word vasistas (a small spy-window), which in turn is a corruption of the German was ist das? Pushkin keeps the more German spelling no doubt because the baker is German.
Verses and jokes in endless streams
Verse will acquire more useful features;
3. vessel: The Church Slavonic use of this term, which adds to the heightened language of this stanza, can mean ‘weapon’, which is what is meant here.
Vexation, jealousy were banished,
Vice in the novel, too, is lauded
Vice was forever beaten down
Vickery, Walter, Alexander Pushkin, revised edn (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1992)
Vickery, Walter N., Pushkin, Death of a Poet (Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press, 1968)
7. Viktor Shklovsky, Ocherki po Poetike Pushkina, Evgeny Onegin (Pushkin i Stern) (Berlin: Epokha, 1923), pp. 199–220.
Villages, trees and valleys spun
Visit again the empty home
Vitale, Serena, Pushkin’s Button (London: Fourth Estate, 1999)
Vladimir answered icily
Vladimir closes Schiller’s verses,
Vladimir dozed, while lingering still
‘Vladimir Lensky doth here lie,
Vladimir Lensky visited
Vladimir said. Behind the mill
Vladimir straightway felt a call
Vladimir to delightful capture
Vladimir, under Olga’s sway,
Vladimir, when his spirits flowed,
Voluptuously through the water
30. Vyazemsky: Pushkin has already referred twice to his friend Vyazemsky – in the epigraph to Chapter I and in lines 6–7 of Chapter III. Here he makes him a member of the cast just as he had done with his friend Kaverin in Chapter I, stanza 16. But, apart from the joke, Vyazemsky appears here as the only surviving figure of any substance in the ‘desert’ of Russian social life after the collapse of the Decembrist revolt.
Waited… for somebody to call,
Wait, I’ll present you, when they end.’
Waiting for him, he’ll find Kaverin.
Wakes villagers to rise and rally.
Wandering in the morning calm.
Wanted the poet’s sweet invention,
Warmed by the god of inspiration,
Was a delightful little spot;
Was born to play this very part.
Was broken by the screech of geese
Was certainly no Grandison.
Was eager to become his man,
Was even younger then than me,
Was far less meaningful to hear.
Was handsome, in his youthful prime,
Was he perturbed by vows reneged on,
Was hers the letter he’d preserved,
Was it for long she mourned her lover?
Was it in vain that, feasting, he
Was it the rage the people vented?
Was lit by virginal desire.
Was looked upon as marriageable;
Was Martin Zadek, Chaldee sage,
Was not contented with his role.
Wasn’t it you, dear vision, beckoned
Wasn’t it you that I was hearing
Was over now; the days rushed by;
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
Was soon to part us and unravel
Was such my habit in my heyday?
Was swift enough. Discussion spared,
Was the beetle a new character, he asked. This apparently inane hostility to the ordinary in Onegin – and other works – was based on Pushkin’s mixing of the ‘low’ with the ‘high’. It was a social as well as literary attack. Something of the sort was experienced by early Wordsworth for similar reasons, but the criticism of him was mild by comparison.
Was what his Olen’ka first said.
Waving its snapping vanes like lances;
We all are contradictory.
We all aspire to be Napoleons;
Wearing a quilted dressing gown;
We both had known the play of passions,
We cannot boast of. Having fought
We countryfolk make little fuss
We’d better hurry to the ball
We dedicated walks and tears,
Wedlock would make you want to leave me.
We drank, in mute intoxication,
We glide across the lacquered boards;
We have automedons, quick-witted,
Weighed down with heavy flocks of snow;
We knew him not at all so regal,
We’ll fly now to the garden where
We’ll leave my hero to his meeting
‘Well, never mind what it may be,
We’ll part the mountains in the skies,
‘Well, send your grandson very quietly –
‘Well then, he’s dead, you understand,’
‘Well, yes; let’s hope I’m entertained.’
We might to foolish jokes respond,
We promise those who hear us maids
Were boring to her equally.
Were celebrated as of old,
We recollect a bitter fortune,
Were destined to be father, spouse,
Were full of sleeping girls. Alone
Were in a friendly tone debated
Were in a unique shape expressed,
Were not, of course, lit up with feeling,
Were on the dinner chairs located,
Were parted by a thirst to kill?
Were picking berries in brigades
Were such the thoughts your endless sound
Were unreservedly malicious,
8. Werther: Hero of Goethe’s Die Leiden des jungen Werthers (The Sorrows of Young Werther, 1774). Werther commits suicide after failing to win the love of Lotte, who is married to his friend.
We sometimes like to lend an ear
Wet-nurses shout and children cry.
Wetting the steel bit, chafing, snorting,
We’ve all learned through our education
We’ve had enough of all his show.
We’ve roamed around the world and back.
We’ve simply utilized it for
We were by old Derzhavin heeded
(We will not mention verses now);
9. We won’t tell fortunes all night through: See Chapter IV, note 6 on the two-rhyme octet in Italian sonnets.
We won’t tell fortunes all night through.
What all day long would occupy
What ardour roused my sleeping sense!
What blissful feelings fill her breast,
What can I hope for in this life?’
What confronts him then, what makes him shudder?
What could Tatiana do but marvel
‘What did you dream, whom did you see?
What does his face show – spleen, hurt pride?
What do I want? To what end, after
What do they mean? Oh, I’d surrender
What else is there that I could say?
What Eugene knew of in addition
Whatever feelings then lay hidden
Whatever Paris, in its hunger,
Whatever, reader, your opinion,
Whatever trinket-dealing London
What followed on from the encounter?
What friends are these, if friends at all,
What from his early adolescence
What! From the steppes, that outback region…?’
What frost surrounds her, how severe!
What fun! There is to be a ball!
‘What Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
What happens if your young companion
‘What in a family’s more depressing
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
What is he then? An imitation,
What is she dreaming of at present?
What is the coming day’s decision?
‘What is your name?’ He looks; anon
What languid tumult, what upheaval
What magic longing caught me, bore me
What matters is this letter here:
What more? Society opined:
What move the other may be making,
What news of plague and conflagrations?
What novel wares from sundry nations
What now enticed her like a siren
What of it? It is pleasing, resonant;
What of the backstage assignations?
What of the quizzical lorgnette?
What pastime can you find that’s pleasing
What people think in any case,
What Pushkin calls his ‘descent’ to prose is, however, more than a matter of using ordinary language. The death of the poet Lensky in Chapter VI not only sounds the knell of Pushkin’s youth, too, but questions the future of his own poetry in a world that kills imagination:
What rhyme now follows, if not ‘perished’?
What shameful cunning to be cheerful
What’s happening? In what strange dream
What shoulders, bosom, soul!… Some time,
What silent sufferings were reflected
What silly places all these are!
What snares he’d set to make him founder!
What’s there to come? Ennui, ennui!
What’s to be done? Once more I say
What talent for appearing novel,
What then? By love intoxicated,
What then? Oh nothing. I’m just laying
What thought it was or observation
What was your answer? Only sternness.
What wicked merriment, what laughter
What will he stage for us meanwhile?
What will he think?’ With torment flaming,
What wind is it that’s blown him here?
What would you like, you’ve but to say…
11. What yearning pressed my flaming heart: Pushkin was in love with a daughter of the Raevsky family, with whom he was staying.
What yearning pressed my flaming heart!
What you were like then I don’t care,
When all came out to view the chaise
When argument became too serious,
When at a gated house arriving,
When caught in a poetic haze,
When cooks, who were not ours, were sent
‘When daybreak comes with rays ascending
When earth’s fine edge is softly glowing,
Whenever, holding her in-quarto,
Whenever nurse, obeying Olga,
When fathers or old uncles met,
When first I met you, I detected
When from the hall they hear the cadence
When he arrived, the guests would labour
When I began this composition
When in good earnest he fell ill,
When, in the land itself they hold
When in the loud monde’s pantomime,
When, in the morning, Eugene saw
When in the stillness I’d depart
When I want somebody to read to,
When noisy comments start to plague you,
When off he’d gallop, undeflected.
When passion’s flame at last is smothered,
When recently in rainy weather
When shall I listen to your chorus,
When shall I listen to your chorus,
When shall I see you all?’ she cries,
When shall I start my freedom’s flight?
When skies at night are limpid, bright
When suddenly, and with a quiver,
When talking of him. Might it be
When tearful poets have been suffered
When times were calm… to full extent;
When to the banner we’ve foregathered
When to your desperate appeal
When, watching you in silent wonder,
When we are free of the constrictions
When we embarked on our narration,
When we lure this fine young lad,
When we see him distantly,
When will the devil let him sink?
When wine’s imported duty-free.
When you with such intelligence
Where age-old fashion is the rule;
Where all her girlfriends will have entered
Where are my dreams, the dreams I cherished?
Where are the promised casks of wine?
Where are you? Come: my rights I raze
Whereas an ode’s majestic sweep
Where better, friends, to spend your time
8. Where bird cherry, acacia climb: Nabokov, with customary botanical expertise, translates ‘bird cherry’ as ‘racemosa’ and ‘acacia’ as ‘pea tree’. He finds ‘racemosa’ more exact than ‘bird cherry’ and points out that the acacia’ of northern Russia (where the story takes place) is imported from Asia, has yellow flowers and is therefore not a true acacia, but a ‘pea tree’. (The more familiar acacia of southern Russia has a white blossom.) Nabokov refers to the yellow’ epithet in the following couplet by Konstantin Batyushkov (1787–1855), which Pushkin is parodying:
Where bird cherry, acacia climb;
Where, blessedly, no thoughts encumber,
Where Bonaparte had pitched his tent.
Where did that gloomy oddball go,
Where do you spend your evenings?’ ‘Why,
Where dwelt that child of inspiration
Where every day a bloodstained shade
Where fashion’s model pupil duly
Where flows a tiny, limpid brook,
Where, forty years, till his demise,
Where, friends, we bathe together now.
Where, friends, we bathe together now.
Where, friends, we bathe together now.
Where God knows whom she was to meet.
Where good Oton serves us politely.
Where, halting, out of breath, she sighs
Where he appeared in former days.
Where he had long shed living tears,
Where I…’ ‘An eclogue’s bound to follow!
Where I beheld you first of all,
Where, in the backwoods, I recall
Where is it better, then?
Where is the noble aspiration
Where is your equal to be found?
Where liberty’s admirers are
Where my Eugene, the very same,
Where now a cross and branches shade
‘Where now? How very like a poet!’
Where now you crush the flowers of spring?
Where only Eugene in their desert
Where our imperious Slav walks cheek-
Where silently the world reposes;
Where’s your companion?’ came the zealous
Where Thalia is quietly napping,
Where the excitement, crush and heat,
Where the Kura, Aragva whirled,
Where, then, upon it with such speed
Where this dull man, pleased with his treasure
Where, too, is love’s acclaimed impatience,
Where to Terpsichore alone
Where we are not.’
Where, where’s the pity, perturbation?
Where Wittgenstein’s detachments quartered,
Where you caroused in winter time;
Whether by cross, by succinct word,
Whether he’s favoured by the skies
Whether I’m pierc&#232;d by an arrow
Whether I’m pierced by an arrow
Whether indeed he feels regret
Whether tumultuous recollections
Whether you were in love at all?’
Which I must needs accept, I know;
Which landed folk are pleased to use!
Which spares the stomach and the head.
While dining in his dressing-gown;
While fairer in his preconceptions
While friends and friendships simply pained him,
While from beyond the gravestone’s remit
While harmless, is nonsensical;
While he’s forgotten in his hut.
While he, the conscientious clubber,
While he was not yet quite eighteen.
While household women, coachmen brawl.
While, interrupting them, good sense
While it would be wrong to say that Pushkin was the first authentically Russian writer, since predecessors like the fabulist Ivan Krylov and the playwright Denis Fonvizin were already incorporating the vernacular in their work, nevertheless he was the first to treat the major events of Russian history and society in an accessible way. He borrowed themes and styles from Western literature only to give them new twists from a Russian perspective. Although he tried his hand at most genres, he was essentially a poet. The new literary language had blossomed into a poetic culture in the generation preceding him, dominated by the Romantic Vasily Zhukovsky and the more classical Konstantin Batyushkov. Zhukovsky gave the language a new expressiveness and musicality, Batyushkov a fresh clarity and precision. Pushkin learned from them both. In his own generation a cluster of poets appeared – Yazykov, Delvig, Baratynsky – who became known as the Pushkin pleiad and appear as minor characters in Eugene Onegin. As elsewhere in contemporary Europe this poetic heyday was short-lived, superseded by the prose novel – Gogol, Turgenev – with which Western readers are more familiar. Pushkin himself went on to produce an historical novel, The Captain’s Daughter (1836), and other works of prose. His poetry reflected a time of hope among the younger members of the nobility, epitomized by two dates – 1812 and 1825.
While just behind her in a corner
While little grasping what he heard,
While melancholical Yakushkin,
While Morpheus was still in flight,
While restless Petersburg already
While rural Cyclopes take courage
While rural engineer Zaretsky
While the cotillion’s endless stream
While they untwined my braid they wept,
While thinking that his head might split;
While to the gravestone it inclines
While underneath her pillow slotted
While we roar out the recitative.
While we whom Hymen will not capture
While you may find a dame among them,
Whispering gravely to each other:
Whispers by heart, unconsciously
Whist’s gallant heroes have completed
Whist too, still one of players’ staples –
Whitening on Tverskaya Street.
‘Whither, ah whither are you fled now,
Whither and wherefore do I strive?
Who are you: guardian angel, mentor,
Who can there be who won’t betray?
Who cooled his love with separation,
Who could at twelve yards hit an ace,
Who could detect Tatiana’s plight,
Who could have taught such tender writing,
Who’d dare to seek the tender creature
Who died a young man and courageous,
Who does not read right to the end
Who don’t deserve the passions or
Who dulls us like an opiate –
Who’d waited there impatiently,
Whoever loves you more than I,
Whoever may be at the door.
Who had with her the hallway key.
Who hates each impulse, every word,
Who is he? Well, it’s my impression
Who is it could not have detected
Who is the man not bored by feigning,
(Who judged him by the strictest scruple)
Who knows, her love perhaps might then
Whole families have made their way
Who’ll cosset us with care and candour?
Who’ll judge a deed or disputation
Who’ll look benignly on our vice?
Who’ll never bore us with his sighs?
Who’ll not bestrew our path with slander?
Whom did your verses idolize?’
Whom for good reason I recall!
Whom pressing throngs of slaves enclose?
Whom then to love? Whom to have faith in?
Whom thirty centuries enshrine.
Who reads to her for whom he longs,
Who saw no harm in books, which he,
Whose fake protection of a tyrant
Whose Finnish Maid I can’t outdo.
‘Whose gaze, exciting inspiration,
Whose hand, that favours my renown,
Whose head is steady, never stirred,
Whose heart, enjoying bliss delightful,
Whose heart experience has chilled,
Whose honour is my pledge for ever.
Who sets aside cold intellect,
Whose urge to reverie is stilled.
Whose wine-filled glass he has not drained,
Who solved your dreams on every page.
Who, step by step, remaining truthful,
Who taught her that affecting rot,
‘Who? That fat general, you mean?’
Who, though more beautiful by far,
Who, thundering through in great display,
Who was our rock here, who our rod?
Who will not tire of the denials,
Who, with his heart and mind, had won
Who yawned with wife and company,
Why blame Tatiana, then? For having
Why don’t I in my shoulder bone
Why ever did you visit us?
Why fight the age’s predilection?
Why has no bullet in me landed?
Why have you marked me for attention?
Why is it I’m not old, infirm,
Why is it I’m not paralytic
Why is this person at our side?
‘Why not?’ ‘Were I like you a singer,
‘Why, Olen’ka is younger than her.’
Why should a happy man suspect?
‘Why, Tanya, what is it?’ ‘I’m cheerless,
17. Why, water… must be wrought: Water was transported to the town for about two miles uphill in small barrels. Later, aqueducts were used.
Why, water! What would you have thought?
Why you’re pursuing me today.
Will be by your relentless gaze
Will generate a heartfelt flutter
Will have acquired a novel backing
Will heed the journals, set up school
Will make us feel at liberty?’
Will merit a regard benign,
Will move into a monastery,
Will no more look like tawdry byways,
Will not appeal to you, I fear,
Will not in Lethe drown, forsaken,
Will occupy my blithe decline.
16. will pat the old man’s laurel crown: Alongside the ignoramus, Pushkin addresses his future devotee. In the ‘old man’ Pushkin optimistically envisages his own future. A Latin teacher at Pushkin’s lyc&#233;e, when introducing a classical text, would always remark: ‘Let’s pat the old man on the head.’
Will pat the old man’s laurel crown!
Will point to my illustrious portrait
Will set Siberia’s captives free
Will unify the Russian land,
Will visit friends for some distraction;
Will you then not forgive her, when
Wilson, Edmund, The Triple Thinkers (New York: Oregon Books, 1977). Twelve essays on literary subjects including ‘In Honour of Pushkin’
Wine in the gleaming glass still fizzes
Wines by the European watered,
Winter, as warming air blew through it,
Winter, Barcl&#225;y or Russia’s God?
Winter that year arrived belated,
Winter!… The peasant, celebrating,
With a congenial soul, that she
With all its glitter, noise and smoke
With all my soul your perfect nature,
With all the finery and faces
With an obedient tear it shone.
With anyone encountered there.
With a request, immodestly:
With a sweet fancy he would cradle
With broom in hand, while at the hall
With butting horns descending low
With candid honour, side by side.
With carefree charm, our lady sat,
With censure, which alas I merit!
With cheek on hand… Ah, what regrets,
With classic features, smooth like marble,
With curious gaze Tatiana ponders
5. With curious gaze… tomcat chants: Dish-divining took place at Yuletide and Twelfth Night. Divining times were divided between ‘holy evenings’ (25–31 December) and ‘fearful evenings’ (1–6 January). Tatiana chose the second period. Girls and women dropped rings into a dish containing water that was then covered with a cloth. As each is removed, a song is sung. The one sung for Tatiana predicts unhappiness and death. Tomcat songs foretell marriage, as Pushkin remarks in a note. In these the tomcat invites the she-cat to join him on his comfortable stove.
With darkening eyes; a glow pervades her,
With dazzling, multi-coloured flowers;
With difficulty write a word.
With dinner, supper, tea my measure.
With disapproval looked thereon:
With dishes, as their rank deserved.
With dreams and heart of former years.
With dreams of some far distant clime,
Withdrew their friendship straightaway.
With ease you’ll see the winter through.
Withered at last, is this the truth?
With errors and distasteful rhymes,
With every meadow, grove in sight,
With exclamations and good cheer.
With feeling driven out by passions,
With feelings joyful and half-anguished:
With fiery sighs and compliments;
With first-rate wit and subtle play,
With gloomy forehead and a hat.
With hair trimmed to the latest fashion,
With having read her Richardson,
With her extended family,
With her, Onegin – and when I
With him Onegin. ‘Lord, at last!’
With his depraved, immoral soul,
With his depraved, immoral soul,
With his embittered, seething mind
With his embittered, seething mind
With his sartorial repertory;
With hope, then introduce confusion
With housekeeper the old man battled,
With houses sinking two feet under;
With inexplicable elation,
Within me – now they are no more:
Within my breast as formerly.
With inspiration new I’ll enter
Within this land of sterile views,
With its abundant feelings that
With jealous apprehension quaking,
With journals and their clientele,
With just two balls till close of day.
With kerchiefed head, her feeble frame
With lampions around it scattered,
With Lensky’s timid, tender passion;
With loftiness and exhortation,
With lofty rooms throughout the dwelling
With love and using all his art;
With maidens’ fainting fits and tears
With melting gaze Tatiana measures
With merry jokes and braggartry.
With neck-cloth overstarched, produced
With neighbour Lensky, now deceased.
With neighbours from estates surrounding;
With Nina Voronskoy, at table,
With Olga to the ball again.
With one sensation in his mind;
With only Russia in his vision,
With orthographic imprecision,
Without a backward look she scurries
Without a doubt you’ll understand.
Without allegiances, I vanished,
Without a word observe Tatiana,
Without Br&#233;guet to govern us:
Without grammatical mistakes.
Without his knowing it, expounded,
Without it there’s no paradise.
Without preamble or delay:
Without preamble or delay:
Without rejecting anyone –
Without replying, hung his head.
Without surprise or wrath… His fading
With passion and intelligence,
With pen and wash she might admire;
With pictures of a happy love,
With Pomeranian dog and spouse.
With ringing music. There awaited
With Russian pancakes (or bliny);
With sails that he can recognize.
With salutations done, Zaretsky
With secret tales and magic aura!
With sharpening contrition growing,
With shouts and calls, the guests clap hard,
With sighs, the ashes of the dead;
With silken patterns she was loath
With solemn mien Onegin heeded
With someone who is halfway dead,
With songs, I fear, that won’t delight her –
With such a name, so out of place.
With such impassioned innocence,
With sudden clip-clop from afar,
With sudden light. She brought me there
With tears my mother begged, entreated
With tears of bitter sorrow flowing,
With tenderness, with not a care,
With their innumerable offspring
With them the watchful girl engages
With The Well-Meaner at their side!
With thundering, whirring, churning waves;
With tragi-nervous demonstrations,
With trivial ladies, vulgar men,
With turbulent imagination,
With weary look she glided hence…
With what a heavy, tender feeling
With what alacrity accepting
With what celestial pride she graces
With what enlivened fascination
With which begin? It matters not:
With you my destiny I’d seal
With young Semyonova; there our
With youth betrayed, its time for me
With you today like a companion.
Witness of glory’s first defeat,
Wolff, Tatiana, Pushkin on Literature (London: Methuen, 1971)
Wondering if he’ll come to find her;
Won’t let a traveller sleep a jot.
Won’t stoop to kiss the hands of ladies;
Won’t take his eyes off her at all.
Woodward, James B., ‘The Principle of Contradictions in Evgeniy Onegin’ in Form and Meaning: Essays on Russian Literature (Columbus, OH: Slavica, c. 1993)
Would at a window silently
Would come to mourn this doleful treasure,
Would fail to touch my heart and would
Would feed the flames of tittle-tattle
Would free the peasants from their yoke.
Would have become a faithful wife
Would Hymen pluck, how many more
Would in a future time emblazon
Would never think to smile at you;
Would not repeat a hundred times,
Would pine, whenever he departed,
Would she attract a person’s gaze.
Wrenches away her golden earrings;
www.penguin.com
20. Yakushkin: Pushkin met Ivan Dmitrievich Yakushkin (1793–1857) in 1829 in St Petersburg and again in the South. One of the topics of the Moscow meetings in 1817 was Alexander’s rumoured plan to move his residence to Warsaw and transfer part of Russia to Poland. It was this prospect that fired Yakushkin’s impulse to assassinate him. Portraits of Yakushkin give an impression of dejection, apparently caused by unhappy love.
Yawning, he reached out for a pen,
Yawns – and begins again to snore.
7. Yazykov: Nikolay Mikhailovich Yazykov (1803–47), Romantic poet.
Yearned to assay the fatal food;
Yet, after all, I am a poet:
(Yet cursing fate in equal measure),
Yet here was found the city’s flower:
Yet I in futile dullness squander
Yet in the chilly winter season
Yet one more thing drove us asunder…
Yet she can’t sleep, when she reposes,
Yet they are yours through thick and thin,
Yet using such a sweet inflection
Yet were my morals not affected,
You are invited there next week.’
‘You are not well.’ ‘My heart is throbbing.’
‘You are unwell,’ her nurse persisted.
You at my feet in coward fashion?
You came in dreams that soon abounded,
You’d be unlikely to discover
You’d never, would you, take in earnest
You, dreams with sacred verses rife!
You drop in twice, then disappear
You, fortune’s favourites, I entreat you, You,
You get from seeing the world!
You hear the serpent’s endless call
‘You know him, then?’ ‘Well, yes and no.’
You know, I make no sense at all.
You, ladies blessed with gentle manners,
You, land of the imagination:
You lived in luxury, refinement.
You’ll fall in love again, I know,
You’ll find here, doubtless, on some pages
You’ll find her portrait there – it’s sweet,
You’ll perish, dear; but till we lose you
You’ll see your fateful tempter there.
You’ll summon up a sombre bliss,
You loved the sumptuous feel instead
‘You mean an ode for each occasion?
Young ladies heard their fortunes told
Young poet, rest and slumber here.’
You, O my Svetlana!
You peaceful places, hill and dell!
You, phantoms of unearthly life,
Your august idol he embraced.
Your chilling glance, that sermon… I’m
Your coaches, ponderously trundling;
Your cold, unsparing homily,
You’re Alexander’s menial.
You’re all aflame’… ‘I’m not unwell:
You’re bound to read here all the pledges
‘You’re kind,’ Vladimir said and drained
‘You’re married.’ ‘Oh, you did not know then?’
‘You’re right and you will surely steer us
Your face is now all poppy red.’
Your faithful mistress has defected
Your fate already you’ve relinquished
Your heart is honest and I prize it:
Your heart, Yazykov, finds the room
Your openness appeals to me;
Your pensive song and adoration?
Your place without replacing you?
Your place without replacing you?
Your rights are honoured in the end.
Your second, then?’ Zaretsky cried.
Your sharp reproach, unfriendly manner,
Your smiling lips, your eyes’ reflections,
Your soul, when without motion lying
Your tears, pen, rhymes, etcetera.
You rural Priams in your manors,
Your whimpering and endless croaking
Your wondrous glances pierced me through,
You showed at least a noble temper
You showed my childish dreams compassion,
Youth, avaricious beyond measure,
You, too, he left in equal measure.
You, too, my reader, ever gracious,
You treat our world with condescension,
You’ve been away a long time – very,
13. (You’ve guessed… ‘petals’: Pushkin parodies a hackneyed rhyme which he himself used elsewhere: morozy/rozy, frosts/roses. The suggestion is perhaps reddening of the cheeks in the cold. The rhyme is irreproducible. Having used settles/petals before, in Chapter 1, stanza 16, I decided to use it again here, hoping that the reader might remember it. In neither case is it a hackneyed rhyme, but in both cases the context is frost. Compare a similar rhyme in Chapter IV, stanza 44, where Pushkin rhymes sladost’ with mladost’, sweetness/youth: Dreams, dreams! Where is your sweetness?/Where is its stock rhyme, youth?’ which I have translated, this time more successfully, I think, as: Where are my dreams, the dreams I cherished?/What rhyme now follows, if not perished’ since cherished’ and perished’ have a more hackneyed ring in English. I have used the same rhyme in Chapter VII, stanza 28. What Pushkin is getting at in both cases is the paucity of rhymes in the Russian poetry of his time.
(You’ve guessed the rhyme to come is ‘petals’,
You’ve guessed, you’re right: my unreformed
You’ve no good reason to gainsay?’
You’ve quietened down, with resignation,
12. You want freedom for yourself alone: Ibid., p. 257.
You waste your energy in vain:
You were the first ones he forswore,
You, who with joy and love persuaded
You will agree with me, my reader,
You will reflect: he loved me, sworn
You with my secret, sad confession,
You won’t abandon me, I’m sure.
You won’t endure it (you’ll agree),
You won’t find much refinement here.
You wrote, in secret, verse and songs,
‘You wrote to me, do not deny it.
‘You yawn, Onegin, what’s the matter?’
Yuletide is come with jubilation;
Zarema first appeared to me
Zaretsky bit his lip, appalled.
Zaretsky gently on the sleigh
Zaretsky measured off in style
Zaretsky, once a brawler and
Zaretsky rose without explaining,
Zaretsky solemnly is sealing
2. Zeus: Supreme god of the ancient Greek pantheon.
Zhukovsky
25. Zizi: Zizi or Yevpraksia Vulf (1809–83) was the youngest daughter of the large Osipov family headed by Praskovia Osipov, widow of Nikolay Vulf and Ivan Osipov. The Osipovs were Pushkin’s nearest neightbours during his exile at Mikhailovskoye (1824–6). He courted fifteen-year-old Zizi and several other members of the clan. Later, in 1829, the two briefly became lovers.
